 
www.obooko.com 

Cook Italian 

Recipes from the book 

THE COOK'S DECAMERON 

By Mrs. W. G. Waters 

This digital edition published in England, with immense respect and gratitude 
to the author, by obooko publishing 2011. 

This free e-book is exclusively for members of obooko. 
For access to hundreds of free fiction and non-fiction e-books please visit: 
www.obooko.com 

©this edition obooko publishing 2011 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Contents 

Soups.................................................................................................... 9 

Minestre ..............................................................................................15 
Fish......................................................................................................17 

Beef, Mutton, Veal, Lamb. .................................................................28 

Tongue, Sweetbread, Calf's Head, Liver, Suckling Pig....................... 36 

Fowl, Duck, Game, Hare, Rabbit. .......................................................51 
Vegetables ..........................................................................................60 

Macaroni, Rice, Polenta, and Other Italian Pastes ............................ 69 

Omelettes And Other Egg Dishes....................................................... 75 

Sweets and Cakes ............................................................................... 79 

Please ensure you observe basic hygiene procedures and take special 
care when working with raw ingredients such as eggs and chicken. 

In all cases, heating and cooking should be performed by adults only. 

These recipes are intended as guides and suggestions only.  
The author, publisher and distributor are not responsible or liable for 
the outcome of any recipe you try. 

 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Note. Some recipes list ‘New Century Sauce’ as an ingredient but, because these 

recipes are taken from a vintage book, this brand may no longer be available. 
Although we are open to suggestions, we guess this may be a type of fish sauce. 

SAUCES  

As the three chief foundation sauces in cookery, Espagnole or brown 
sauce, Velute or white sauce, and Bechamel, are alluded to so often in 
these pages, it will be well to give simple Italian recipes for them.  

Australian wines may be used in all recipes where wine is mentioned: 
Harvest Burgundy for red, and Chasselas for Chablis.  

No. 1. Espagnole, or Brown Sauce  

The  chief  ingredient  of  this  useful  sauce  is  good  stock,  to  which  add 
any  remnants  and  bones  of  fowl  or  game.  Butter  the  bottom  of  a 
stewpan with at least two ounces of butter, and in it put slices of lean 
veal,  ham,  bacon,  cuttings  of  beef,  fowl,  or  game  trimmings,  three 
peppercorns,  mushroom  trimmings,  a  tomato,  a  carrot  and  a  turnip 
cut  up,  an  onion  stuck  with  two  cloves,  a  bay  leaf,  a  sprig  of  thyme, 
parsley and marjoram. Put the lid on the stewpan and braize well for 
fifteen  minutes,  then  stir  in  a  tablespoonful  of  flour,  and  pour  in  a 
quarter  pint  of  good  boiling  stock  and  boil  very  gently  for  fifteen 
minutes, then strain through a tamis, skim off all the grease, pour the 
sauce  into  an  earthenware  vessel,  and  let  it  get  cold.  If  it  is  not  rich 
enough, add a little Liebig or glaze. Pass through a sieve again before 
using.  

 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 2. Velute Sauce  

The same as above, but use white stock, no beef, and only pheasant or 
fowl  trimmings,  button  mushrooms,  cream  instead  of  glaze,  and  a 
chopped shallot.  

No. 3. Bechamel Sauce  

Ingredients:  Butter,  ham,  veal,  carrots,  shallot,  celery  bay  leaf, 
cloves, thyme, peppercorns, potato flour, cream, fowl stock.  

Prepare a mirepoix by mixing two ounces of butter, trimmings of lean 
veal and ham, a carrot, a shallot, a little celery, all cut into dice, a bay 
leaf,  two  cloves,  four  peppercorns,  and  a  little  thyme.  Put  this  on  a 
moderate  fire  so  as  not  to  let  it  colour,  and  when  all  the  moisture  is 
absorbed add a tablespoonful of potato flour. Mix well, and gradually 
add  equal  quantities  of  cream  and  fowl  stock,  and  stir  till  it  boils. 
Then  let  it  simmer  gently.  Stir  occasionally,  and  if  it  gets  too  thick, 
add more cream and white stock. After two hours pass it twice slowly 
through a tamis so as to get the sauce very smooth.  

No. 4. Mirepoix Sauce (for masking)  

Ingredients: Bacon, onions, carrots, ham, a bunch of herbs, parsley, 
mushrooms, cloves, peppercorns, stock, Chablis.  

Put the following ingredients into a stewpan: Some bits of bacon and 
lean ham, a carrot, all cut into dice, half an onion, a bunch of herbs, a 
few  mushroom  cuttings,  two  cloves,  and  four  peppercorns.  To  this 
add  one and a  quarter pint  of good stock and  a glass of  Chablis, boil 
rapidly for ten minutes then simmer till it is reduced to a third. Pass 
through a sieve and use for masking meat, fowl, fish, &c.  

 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 5. Genoese Sauce  

Ingredients: Onion, butter, Burgundy, mushrooms, truffles, parsley, 
bay  leaf,  Espagnole  sauce  (No.1),  blond  of  veal,  essence  of  fish, 
anchovy butter, crayfish or lobster butter.  

Cut  up  a  small  onion  and  fry  it  in  butter,  add  a  glass  of  Burgundy, 
some cuttings of mushrooms and truffles, a pinch of chopped parsley 
and half a bay leaf. Reduce half. In another saucepan put two cups of 
Espagnole sauce, one cup of veal stock, and a tablespoonful of essence 
of fish, reduce one-third and add it to the other saucepan, skim off all 
the grease, boil for a few minutes, and pass through a sieve. Then stir 
it  over  the  fire,  and  add  half  a  teaspoonful  of  crayfish  and  half  of 
anchovy butter.  

No. 6. Italian Sauce  

Ingredients:  Chablis,  mushrooms, 
peppercorns, Espagnole sauce, game gravy or stock, lemon.  

leeks,  a  bunch  of  herbs, 

Put  into  a  stewpan  two  glasses  of  Chablis,  two  tablespoonsful  of 
mushroom  trimmings,  a  leek  cut  up,  a  bunch  of  herbs,  five 
peppercorns, and boil till it is reduced to half. In another stewpan mix 
two  glasses  of  Espagnole  (No.  1)  or  Velute  sauce  (No  2)  and  half  a 
glass of game gravy, boil for a few minutes then blend the contents of 
the two stewpans, pass through a sieve, and add the juice of a lemon.  

No. 7. Ham Sauce, Salsa di Prosciutto  

Ingredients: Ham, Musca or sweet port, vinegar, basil spice.  

Cut  up  an  ounce  of  ham  and  pound  it  in  a  mortar  then  mix  it  with 
three dessert spoonsful of port or Musca and a teaspoonful of vinegar 
a  little  dried  basil  and  a  pinch  of  spice.  Boil  it  up,  and  then  pass  it 
through  a  sieve  and  warm  it  up  in  a  bain-marie.  Serve  with  roast 
meats. If you cannot get a sweet wine add half a teaspoonful of sugar. 
Australian Muscat is a good wine to use.  

 5 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 8. Tarragon Sauce  

Ingredients: Tarragon, stock, butter, flour.  

To  half  a  pint  of  good  stock  add  two  good  sprays  of  fresh  tarragon, 
simmer  for  quarter  of  an  hour  in  a  stewpan  and  keep  the  lid  on.  In 
another  stewpan  melt  one  ounce  of  butter  and  mix  it  with  three 
dessert-spoonsful of flour, then gradually pour the stock from the first 
stewpan over it, but take out the tarragon. Mix well, add a teaspoonful 
of finely chopped tarragon and boil for two minutes.  

No. 9. Tomato Sauce  

Ingredients: Tomatoes, ham, onions, basil, salt, oil, garlic, spices.  

Broil three tomatoes, skin them and mix them with a tablespoonful of 
chopped  ham,  half  an  onion,  salt,  a  dessert-spoonful  of  oil,  a  little 
pounded  spice  and  basil.  Then  boil  and  pass  through  a  sieve.  Whilst 
the sauce is  boiling, put in a clove of garlic with  a  cut,  but remove it 
before you pass the sauce through the sieve.  

No. 10. Tomato Sauce Piquante  

Ingredients:  Ham,  butter,  onion,  carrot,  celery,  bay  leaf,  thyme, 
cloves,  peppercorns,  vinegar,  Chablis,  stock,  tomatoes,  Velute  or 
Espagnole sauce, castor sugar, lemon.  

Cut  up  an  ounce  of  ham,  half  an  onion,  half  a  carrot,  half  a  stick  of 
celery  very  fine,  and  fry  them  in  butter  together  with  a  bay  leaf,  a 
sprig of thyme, one clove and four peppercorns. Over this pour a third 
of  a  cup  of  vinegar,  and  when  the  liquid  is  all  absorbed,  add  half  a 
glass of Chablis and a cup of stock. Then add six tomatoes cut up and 
strained of all their liquid. Cook this in a covered stewpan and pass it 
through  a  sieve,  but  see  that  none  of  the  bay  leaf  or  thyme  goes 
through.  Mix  this  sauce  with  an  equal  quantity  of  Velute  (No.  2)  or 
Espagnole sauce, (No. 1), let it boil and pass through a sieve again and 
at the last add a teaspoonful of castor sugar, the juice of half a lemon, 
and  an  ounce  of  fresh  butter.  (Another  tomato  sauce  may  be  made 

 6 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

like  this,  but  use  stock  instead  of  vinegar  and  leave  out  the  lemon 
juice and sugar.)  

No. 11. Mushroom Sauce  

Ingredients: Velute sauce, essence of mushrooms, butter.  

Mix two dessert-spoonsful of essence  of mushrooms with a cupful of 
Velute sauce (No. 2), reduce, keep on stirring, and just before serving 
add  an  ounce  of  butter.  This  sauce  can  be  made  with  essence  of 
truffle, or game, or shallot.  

No. 12. Neapolitan Sauce  

Ingredients:  Onions,  ham,  butter,  Marsala,  blond  of  veal,  thyme, 
bay leaf, peppercorns, cloves,  mushrooms, Espagnole sauce (No. 1), 
tomato sauce, game stock or essence.  

Fry an onion in butter with some bits of cut-up ham, then pour a glass 
of Marsala over it, and another of blond of veal, add a sprig of thyme, 
a  bay  leaf,  four  peppercorns,  a  clove,  a  tablespoonful  of  mushroom 
cuttings,  and  reduce  half.  In  another  saucepan  put  two  cups  of 
Espagnole sauce, one cupful of tomato sauce, and half a cup of game 
stock  or  essence.  Reduce  a  third,  and  add  the  contents  of  the  first 
saucepan,  boil  the  sauce  a  few  minutes,  and  pass  it  through  a  sieve. 
Warm it up in a bain-marie before using.  

No. 13. Neapolitan Anchovy Sauce  

Ingredients:  Anchovies,  fennel,  flour,  spices,  parsley,  marjoram, 
garlic, lemon juice, vinegar, cream.  

Wash  three  anchovies  in  vinegar,  bone  and  pound  them  in  a  mortar 
with a teaspoonful of chopped fennel and a pinch of cinnamon. Then 
mix in a teaspoonful  of chopped  parsley and marjoram,  a squeeze of 
lemon juice, a teaspoonful of flour, half a gill of boiled cream and the 
bones  of  the  fish  for  which  you  will  use  this  sauce.  Pass  through  a 

 7 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

sieve, add a clove of garlic with a cut in it, and boil. If the fish you are 
using  is  cooked  in  the  oven,  add  a  little  of  the  liquor  in  which  it  has 
been cooked to the sauce. Take out the garlic before serving. Instead 
of anchovies you may use caviar, pickled tunny, or any other pickled fish.  

No. 14. Roman Sauce (Salsa Agro-dolce)  

Ingredients:  Espagnole  sauce,  stock,  burnt  sugar,  vinegar,  raisins, 
pine nuts or almonds.  

Mix two spoonsful of burnt sugar with one of vinegar, and dilute with 
a  little  good  stock.  Then  add  two  cups  of  Espagnole  sauce  (No.  1),  a 
few  stoned  raisins,  and  a  few  pinocchi*  (pine  nuts)  or  shredded 
almonds. Keep this hot in a  bain-marie, and serve with cutlets, calf's 
head or feet or tongue.  

*The  pinocchi  which  Italians  use  instead  of  almonds  can  be  bought 
when in season.  

No. 15. Roman Sauce (another way)  

Ingredients: Espagnole sauce, an onion, butter, flour, lemon, herbs, 
nutmeg, raisins, pine nuts or almonds, burnt sugar.  

Cut  up  a  small  bit  of  onion,  fry  it  slightly  in  butter  and  a  little  flour, 
add  the  juice  of  a  lemon  and  a  little  of  the  peel  grated,  a  bouquet  of 
herbs, a pinch of nutmeg, a few stoned raisins, shredded almonds or 
pinocchi,  and  a  tablespoonful  of  burnt  sugar.  Add  this  to  a  good 
Espagnole (No. 1), and warm it up in a bain-marie.  

No. 16. Supreme Sauce  

Ingredients: White sauce, fowl stock, butter.  

Put three-quarters of a pint of white sauce into a saucepan, and when 
it is nearly boiling add half a cup of concentrated fowl stock. Reduce 
until the sauce is quite thick, and when about to serve pass it through 
a tamis into a bain-marie and add two tablespoonsful of cream.  

 8 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 17. Pasta marinate (For masking Italian Frys)  

Ingredients: Semolina flour, eggs, salt, butter (or olive oil), vinegar, 
water.  

Mix  the  following  ingredients  well  together:  two  ounces  of  semolina 
flour,  the  yolks  of  two  eggs,  a  little  salt,  and  two  ounces  of  melted 
butter.  Add  a  glass  of  water  so  as  to  form  a  liquid  substance.  At  the 
last add the whites of two eggs beaten up to a snow. This will make a 
good paste for masking meat, fish, vegetables, or sweets which are to 
be fried in the Italian manner, but if for meat or vegetables add a few 
drops of vinegar or a little lemon juice.  

No. 18. White Villeroy  

Ingredients: Butter, flour, eggs, cream, nutmeg, white stock.  

Make  a  light-coloured  roux  by  frying  two  ounces  of  butter  and  two 
ounces of flour, stir in some white stock and keep it very smooth. Let 
it boil, and add the yolks of three eggs, mixed with two tablespoonsful 
of  cream  and  a  pinch  of  nutmeg.  Pass  it  through  a  sieve  and  use  for 
masking cutlets, fish, &c.  

SOUPS  

No. 19. Clear Soup  

Ingredients:  Stock  meat,  water,  a  bunch  of  herbs  (thyme,  parsley, 
chervil, bay leaf, basil, marjoram), three carrots, three turnips, three 
onions, three cloves stuck in the onions, one blade of mace.  

Cut up three pounds of stock meat small and put it in a stock pot with 
two quarts of cold water, three carrots, and three turnips cut up, three 
onions with a clove stuck in each one, a bunch of herbs and a blade of 
mace. Let it come to the boil and then draw it off, at once skim off all 

 9 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

the scum, and keep it gently simmering, and occasionally add two or 
three  tablespoonsful  of  cold  water.  Let  it  simmer  all  day,  and  then 
strain it through a fine cloth.  

Some of the liquor in which  a calf's head has  been cooked, or even a 
calf's foot, will greatly improve a clear soup.  

The  stock  should  never  be  allowed  to  boil  as  long  as  the  meat  and 
vegetables are in the stock pot.  

No. 20. Zuppa Primaverile (Spring Soup)  

Ingredients: Clear soup, vegetables.  

Any fresh spring vegetables will do for this soup, but they must all be 
cooked  separately and put into the soup at the last minute. It is  best 
made with fresh peas, asparagus tips, and a few strips of tarragon.  

No. 21. Soup alla Lombarda  

Ingredients:  Clear  soup,  fowl  forcemeat,  Bechamel  (No.  3),  peas, 
lobster butter, eggs, asparagus.  

Make  a  firm  forcemeat  of  fowl  and  divide  it  into  three  parts,  to  the 
first  add  two  spoonsful  of  cream  Bechamel,  to  the  second  four 
spoonsful of puree of green peas, to the third two spoonsful of lobster 
butter  and  the  yolk  of  an  egg;  thus  you  will  have  the  Italian  colours, 
red,  white,  and  green.  Butter  a  pie  dish  and  make  little  quenelles  of 
the  forcemeat.  Just  before  serving  boil  them  for  four  minutes  in 
boiling  stock,  take  them  out  carefully  and  put  them  in  a  warm  soup 
tureen with two spoonsful of cooked green peas and pour a very fresh 
clear  soup  over  them.  Hand  little  croutons  fried  in  lobster  butter 
separately.  

 10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 22. Tuscan Soup  

Ingredients: Stock, eggs.  

Whip  up  three  or  four  eggs,  gradually  add  good  stock  to  them,  and 
keep  on  whisking  them  up  until  they  begin  to  curdle.  Keep  the  soup 
hot in a bain-marie.  

No. 23. Venetian Soup  

Ingredients: Clear soup, butter, flour, Parmesan, eggs.  

Make  a roux by frying  two  ounces  of butter  and two ounces  of flour, 
add  an  ounce  of  grated  cheese  and  half  a  cup  of  good  stock.  Mix  up 
well  so  as  to  form  a  paste,  and  then  take  it  off  the  fire  and  add  the 
yolks  of  four  eggs,  mix  again  and  form  the  again  and  form  the  paste 
into  little  quenelles.  Boil  these  in  a  little  soup,  strain  off,  put  them 
into the tureen and pour a good clear soup over them.  

No. 24. Roman Soup  

Ingredients:  Stock,  butter,  eggs,  salt,  crumb  of  bread,  parsley, 
nutmeg, flour, Parmesan.  

Mix three and a half ounces of  butter with two eggs and four ounces 
of crumbs of bread soaked in stock, a little chopped parsley, salt, and 
a  pinch  of  nutmeg.  Reduce  this  and  add  two  tablespoonsful  of  flour 
and  one  of  grated  Parmesan.  Form  this  into  little  quenelles  and  boil 
them  in  stock  for  a  few  minutes  put  them  into  a  tureen  and  pour  a 
good clear soup over them.  

No. 25. Soup alla Nazionale  

Ingredients: Clear soup, savoury custard.  

Make  a  savoury  custard  and  divide  it  into  three  parts,  one  to  be  left 
white,  another  coloured  red  with  tomato,  and  the  third  green  with 
spinach. Put a layer of each in a buttered saucepan and cook for about 

 11 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

ten minutes, cut it into dice, so that you have the three Italian colours 
(red,  white,  and  green)  together,  then  put  the  custard  into  a  soup 
tureen and pour a good clear soup over it.  

No. 26. Soup alla Modanese  

Ingredients:  Stock,  spinach,  butter,  salt,  eggs,  Parmesan,  nutmeg, 
croutons.  

Wash one pound of spinach in five or six waters, then chop it very fine 
and mix it with three ounces of butter, salt it and warm it up. Then let 
it  get  cold,  pass  through  a  hair  sieve,  and  add  two  eggs,  a 
tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, and very little nutmeg. Add this to 
some  boiling  stock  in  a  copper  saucepan,  put  on  the  lid,  and  on  the 
top put some hot coals so that the eggs may curdle and help to thicken 
the soup. Serve with fried croutons.  

No. 27. Crotopo Soup  

Ingredients: Clear soup, veal, ham, eggs, salt, pepper, nutmeg, rolls.  

Pound half a pound of lean veal in a mortar, then add three ounces of 
cooked ham with some fat in it,  the yolk of  an egg, salt, pepper,  and 
very little nutmeg. Pass through a sieve, cut some  small French rolls 
into  slices,  spread  them  with  the  above  mixture,  and  colour  them  in 
the oven. Then cut them in halves or quarters, put them into a tureen, 
and just before serving pour a very good clear soup over them.  

No. 28. Soup all'Imperatrice  

Ingredients: Breast of fowl, eggs, salt, pepper, ground rice, nutmeg, 
clear stock.  

Pound the breast of a fowl in a mortar, and add to it a teaspoonful of 
ground  rice,  the  yolk  of  an  egg,  salt,  pepper,  and  a  pinch  of  nutmeg. 
Pass  this  through  a  sieve,  form  quenelles  with  it,  and  pour  a  good 
clear soup over them.  

 12 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 29. Neapolitan Soup  

Ingredients:  Fowl,  potato  flour,  eggs,  Bechamel  sauce,  peas, 
asparagus, spinach, clear soup.  

Mix  a  quarter  pound  of  forcemeat  of  fowl  with  a  tablespoonful  of 
potato flour, a tablespoonful of Bechamel sauce (No. 3), and the yolk 
of  an  egg;  put  this  into  a  tube  about  the  size  round  of  an  ordinary 
macaroni;  twenty  minutes  before  serving  squirt  the  forcemeat  into  a 
saucepan  with  boiling  stock,  and  nip  off  the  forcemeat  as  it  comes 
through  the  pipe  into  pieces  about  an  inch  and  a  half  long.  Let  it 
simmer,  and  add  boiled  peas  and  asparagus  tips.  If  you  like  to  have 
the fowl macaroni white and green, you can colour half the forcemeat 
with a spoonful of spinach colouring. Serve in a good clear soup.  

No. 30. Soup with Risotto  

Ingredients:  Risotto  (No.  189),  eggs,  bread  crumbs,  clear  or  brown 
soup.  

If you have some good risotto left, you can use it up by making it into 
little balls the size of small nuts. Egg and bread crumb and fry them in 
butter; dry them and put them into a soup tureen with hot soup. The 
soup may be either clear or brown.  

No. 31. Soup alla Canavese  

Ingredients:  White  stock,  butter,  onions,  carrot,  celery,  tomato, 
cauliflower, fat bacon, parsley, sage, Parmesan, salt, pepper.  

Chop up half an onion, half a carrot, half a stick of celery, a small bit 
of  fat  bacon,  and  fry  them  in  two  ounces  of  butter.  Then  cover  them 
with  good  white  stock,  boil  for  a  few  minutes,  pass  through  a  sieve, 
and  add  two  tablespoonsful  of  tomato  puree.  Then  blanch  half  a 
cauliflower in salted water, let it get cold, drain all the water out of it, 
and break it up into little bunches and put them into a stock pot with 
the stock, a small leaf of dried sage, crumbled up, and a little chopped 

 13 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

parsley,  and  let  it  all  boil;  add  a  pinch  of  grated  cheese  and  some 
pepper. Serve with grated Parmesan handed separately.  

No. 32. Soup alla Maria Pia  

Ingredients:  White  stock,  eggs,  butter,  peas,  white  beans,  carrot, 
onion, leeks, celery, cream croutons.  

Soak one pound of white beans for twelve hours, then put them into a 
stock  pot  with  a  little  salt,  butter,  and  water,  add  a  carrot,  an  onion, 
two  leeks,  and  a  stick  of  celery,  and  simmer  until  the  vegetables  are 
well  cooked;  then  take  out  all  the  fresh  vegetables,  drain  the  beans 
and pass them through a sieve, but first dilute them with good stock. 
Put this puree into a stock pot with good white stock, and when it has 
boiled  keep  it  hot  in  a  bain-marie  until  you  are  about  to  serve;  then 
mix the yolk of three eggs in a cup of cream, and add this to the soup. 
Pour  the  soup  into  a  warm  tureen,  add  some  boiled  green  peas,  and 
serve with fried croutons handed separately.  

No. 33. Zuppa d' Erbe (Lettuce Soup)  

Ingredients:  Stock,  sorrel,  endive,  lettuce,  chervil,  celery,  carrot, 
onion, French roll, Parmesan cheese.  

Boil  the  following  vegetables  and  herbs  in  very  good  stock  for  an 
hour:  Two  small  bunches  of  sorrel,  a  bunch  of  endive,  a  lettuce,  a 
small bunch of chervil, a stick of celery, a carrot and an onion, all well 
washed and cut up. Then put some slices of toasted French roll into a 
tureen  and  pour  the  above  soup  over  them.  Serve  with  grated 
Parmesan handed separately.  

No. 34. Zuppa Regina di Riso (Queen's Soup)  

Ingredients: Fowl stock, ground rice, milk, butter.  

Put a tablespoonful of ground rice into a saucepan and gradually add 
half  a  pint  of  milk,  boil  it  gently  for  twelve  minutes  in  a  bainmarie, 

 14 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

but stir the whole time, so as to get it very smooth. Just before serving 
add an ounce of  butter, pass it through a sieve, and mix it with good 
fowl stock.  

MINESTRE  

Minestra is a thick broth, very much like hotch-potch, only thicker. In 
Italy  it  is  often  served  at  the  beginning  of  dinner  instead  of  soup;  it 
also  makes  an  excellent  lunch  dish.  Two  or  three  tablespoonsful  of 
No. 35 will be found a great improvement to any of these minestre.  

No. 35. A Condiment for Seasoning Minestre, &c.  

Ingredients:  Onions,  celery,  carrots,  butter,  salt,  stock,  tomatoes, 
mushrooms.  

Cut up an onion, a stick of celery, and a carrot; fry them in butter and 
salt; add a few  bits of  cooked ham and veal cut up,  two  mushrooms, 
and  the  pulp  of  a  tomato.  Cook  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  add  a 
little stock occasionally to keep it moist. Pass through a sieve, and use 
for  seasoning  minestre,  macaroni,  rice,  &c.  It  should  be  added  when 
the dish is nearly cooked.  

No. 36. Minestra alla Casalinga  

Ingredients: Rice, butter, stock, vegetables.  

All sorts of vegetables will serve for this dish. Blanch them in boiling 
salted  water,  then  drain  and  fry  them  in  butter.  Add  plenty  of  good 
stock,  and  put  them  on  a  slow  fire.  Boil  four  ounces  of  rice  in  stock, 
and  when  it  is  well  done  add  the  stock  with  the  vegetables.  Season 
with  two  or  three  spoonsful  of  No.  35,  and  serve  with  grated  cheese 
handed separately.  

 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 37. Minestra of Rice and Turnips  

Ingredients: Rice, turnips, butter, gravy, tomatoes.  

Cut  three  or  four  young  turnips  into  slices  and  put  them  on  a  dish, 
strew  a  little  salt  over  them,  cover  them  with  another  dish,  and  let 
them stand for about two hours  until the water has run out  of them. 
Then drain the slices,  put them in a frying-pan and fry them slightly 
in  butter.  Add  some  good  gravy  and  mashed-up  tomatoes,  and  after 
having cooked this for  a few minutes pour it into good  boiling stock. 
Add three ounces of well-washed rice, and boil for half-an-hour.  

Minestra  loses  its  flavour  if  it  is  boiled  too  long.  In  Lombardy, 
however,  rice,  macaroni,  &c.,  are  rarely  boiled  enough  for  English 
tastes.  

No. 38. Minestra alla Capucina  

Ingredients: Rice, anchovies, butter, stock, and onions.  

Scale an anchovy, pound it, and fry it in butter together with a small 
onion cut across, and four ounces of boiled rice. Add a little salt, and 
when the rice is a golden brown, take out the onion and gradually add 
some good stock until the dish is of the consistency of rice pudding.  

No. 39. Minestra of Semolina  

Ingredients: Stock, semolina, Parmesan.  

Put as much stock as you require into a saucepan, and when it begins 
to  boil  add  semolina  very  gradually,  and  stir  to  keep  it  from  getting 
lumpy  Cook  it  until  the  semolina  is  soft,  and  serve  with  grated 
Parmesan  handed  separately.  To  one  quart  of  soup  use  three  ounces 
of semolina.  

 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 40. Minestrone alla Milanese  

Ingredients:  Rice  or  macaroni,  ham,  bacon,  stock,  all  sorts  of 
vegetables.  

Minestrone  is  a  favourite  dish  in  Lombardy  when  vegetables  are 
plentiful.  Boil  all  sorts  of  vegetables  in  stock,  and  add  bits  of  bacon, 
ham, onions braized in butter, chopped parsley, a clove of garlic with 
two  cuts,  and  rice  or  macaroni.  Put  in  those  vegetables  first  which 
require most cooking, and do not make the broth too thin. Leave the 
garlic in for a quarter of an hour only.  

No. 41. Minestra of Rice and Cabbage  

Ingredients: Rice, cabbage, stock, ham, tomato sauce.  

Cut off the stalk and all the hard outside leaves of a cabbage, wash it 
and cut it up, but not too small, then drain and cook it in good stock 
and  add  two  ounces  of  boiled  rice.  This  minestre  is  improved  by 
adding a little chopped ham and a few spoonsful of tomato sauce.  

No. 42. Minestra of Rice and Celery  

Ingredients: Celery, rice, stock.  

Cut up a head of celery and remove all the green parts, then boil it in 
good stock and add two ounces of rice, and boil till it is well cooked.  

FISH  

No. 43. Anguilla alla Milanese (Eels).  

Ingredients:  Eels,  butter,  flour,  stock,  bay  leaves,  salt,  pepper, 
Chablis, a macedoine of vegetables.  

 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Cut  up  a  big  eel  and  fry  it  in  two  ounces  of  butter,  and  when  it  is  a 
good colour add a tablespoonful of flour, about half a pint of stock, a 
glass  of  Chablis,  a  bay  leaf,  pepper,  and  salt,  and  boil  till  it  is  well 
cooked.  In  the  meantime  boil  separately  all  sorts  of  vegetables,  such 
as  carrots,  cauliflower,  celery,  beans,  tomatoes,  &c.  Take  out  the 
pieces  of  eel,  but  keep  them  hot,  whilst  you  pass  the  liquor  which 
forms  the  sauce  through  a  sieve  and  add  the  vegetables  to  this.  Let 
them boil a little longer and arrange them in a dish; place the pieces 
of eel on them and cover with the sauce. It is most important that the 
eels should be served very hot.  

Any sort of fish will do as well for this dish.  

No. 44. Filletti di Pesce alla Villeroy (Fillets of Fish)  

Ingredients: Fish, flour, butter, Villeroy.  

Any sort of fish will do, turbot, sole, trout, &c. Cut it into fillets, flour 
them over and cook them in butter in a covered stewpan; then make a 
Villeroy (No. 18), dip the fillets into it and fry them in clarified butter.  

No. 45. Astachi all'Italiana (Lobster)  

Ingredients:  Lobsters,  Velute  sauce,  Marsala,  butter,  forcemeat  of 
fish,  olives,  anchovy  butter,  button  mushrooms,  truffles,  lemon, 
crayfish, Italian sauce.  

Two  boiled  lobsters  are  necessary.  Cut  all  the  flesh  of  one  of  the 
lobsters  into  fillets  and  put  them  into  a  saucepan  with  half  a  cup  of 
Velute  sauce  (No.  2)  and  half  a  glass  of  Marsala,  and  boil  for  a  few 
minutes. Put a crouton of fried bread on an oval dish and cover it with 
a forcemeat of fish, and on this place the whole lobster, cover it with 
buttered  paper,  and  put  it  in  a  moderate  oven  just  long  enough  to 
cook  the  forcemeat.  Then  make  some  quenelles  of  anchovy  butter, 
olives,  and  button  mushrooms,  mix  them  with  Italian  sauce  (No.  6), 
and  garnish  the  dish  with  them,  and  round  the  crouton  arrange  the 
fillets  of  lobster  with  a  garnish  of  slices  of  truffle.  Add  a  dessert-

 18 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

spoonful  of  crayfish  butter  and  a  good  squeeze  of  lemon  juice  to  the 
sauce, and serve.  

No. 46. Baccala alla Giardiniera (Cod)  

Ingredients: Cod or hake, carrots, turnips, butter, herbs.  

Boil a piece of cod or hake and break it up into flakes, then cut up two 
carrots and a turnip; boil them gently, and when they are half boiled 
drain  and  put  them  into  a  stewpan  with  an  ounce  of  butter,  half  a 
teacup  of  boiling  water,  salt,  and  herbs.  When  they  are  well  cooked 
add the fish and serve. Fillets of lemon soles may also be cooked this 
way.  

No. 47. Triglie alla Marinara (Mullet)  

Ingredients: Mullet, salt, pepper, onions, parsley, oil, water.  

Cut  a  mullet  into  pieces  and  put  it  into  a  stewpan  (with  the  lid  on), 
with  salt,  pepper,  a  cut-up  onion,  some  chopped  parsley,  half  a 
wineglass  of  the  finest  olive  oil  and  half  a  pint  of  water,  and  in  this 
cook the fish gently. Arrange the fillets on a  dish,  pour a little of the 
broth over them, and add the onion and parsley. Instead of mullet you 
can use cod, hake, whiting, lemon sole, &c.  

No. 48. Mullet alla Tolosa  

Ingredients:  Mullet,  butter,  salt,  onions,  parsley,  almonds, 
anchovies, button mushrooms, tomatoes.  

Cut off the fins and gills of a mullet, put it in a fireproof dish with two 
ounces  of  butter  and  salt.  Cut  up  a  small  bit  of  onion,  a  sprig  of 
parsley,  a  few  blanched  almonds,  one  anchovy,  and  a  few  button 
mushrooms, previously softened in hot water, and put them over the 
fish  and  bake  for  twenty  minutes  Then  add  two  tablespoonsful  of 
tomato  sauce  or  puree,  and  when  cooked  serve.  If  you  like,  use  sole 
instead of mullet.  

 19 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 49. Mullet alla Triestina  

Ingredients:  Mullet  (or  sole  or  turbot),  butter,  salt  half  a  lemon, 
Chablis.  

Put  the  fish  in  a  fireproof  dish  with  one  and  a  half  ounces  of  butter, 
salt, a squeeze of lemon juice, and half a glass of Chablis. Put it on a 
very,  slow  fire  and  turn  the  fish  when  necessary.  When  it  is  cooked 
serve in the dish.  

No. 50. Whiting alla Genovese  

Ingredients:  Whiting,  butter,  pepper,  salt,  bay  leaf  claret,  parsley, 
onions,  garlic  capers,  vinegar,  Espagnole  sauce,  mushrooms, 
anchovies.  

Put one or two whiting into a stewpan with two ounces of butter, salt, 
pepper,  two  bay  leaves,  and  a  glass  of  claret  or  Burgundy;  cook  on  a 
hot  fire  and  turn  the  fish  when  necessary.  Have  ready  beforehand  a 
remoulade  sauce  made in the following manner:  Put  in  a saucepan 1 
1/2  ounces  of  butter,  half  a  teaspoonful  of  chopped  parsley,  half  an 
onion,  a  clove  of  garlic  (with  one  cut),  four  capers,  one  anchovy,  all 
chopped  up  except  the  garlic.  Then  add  three  tablespoonsful  of 
vinegar  and  reduce  the  sauce.  Add  two  glasses  of  Espagnole  sauce 
(No.  1)  and  a  little  good  stock;  boil  it  all  up  (take  out  the  garlic  and 
bay  leaves)  and  pass  through  a  sieve,  then  pour  it  over  the  whiting. 
Boil it  all again for a few  minutes,  and before serving garnish with a 
few  button  mushrooms  cooked  separately.  The  remoulade  sauce  will 
be much better if made some hours beforehand.  

No. 51. Merluzzo in Bianco (Cod)  

Ingredients:  Cod  or  whiting,  salt,  onions,  parsley,  cloves,  turnips, 
marjoram, chervil, milk.  

Boil  gently  in  a  big  cupful  of  salted  water  two  onions,  one  turnip,  a 
pinch  of  chopped  parsley,  chervil,  and  marjoram  and  four  cloves. 
After  half  an  hour  pass  this  through  a  sieve  (but  first  take  out  the 

 20 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

cloves),  and  add  an  equal  quantity  of  milk  and  a  little  cream,  and  in 
this cook the fish and serve with the sauce over it.  

No. 52. Merluzzo in Salamoia (Cod)  

Ingredients: Cod, hake, whiting or red mullet, onions, parsley, mint, 
marjoram,  turnips,  mushrooms,  chervil,  cloves,  salt,  milk,  cream, 
eggs.  

Put  a  salt-spoonful  of  salt,  two  onions,  a  little  parsley,  marjoram, 
mint, chervil, a turnip, a mushroom, and the heads of two cloves into 
a stewpan and simmer in a cupful of milk for half an hour, then let all 
the ingredients settle at the bottom, and pass the broth through a hair 
sieve, and add to it an equal quantity of milk or cream, and in it cook 
your  fish  on  a  slow  fire.  When  the  fish  is  quite  cooked,  pour  off  the 
sauce, but leave a little on the fish to keep it warm; reduce the rest in 
a  bain-marie;  stir  all  the  time,  so  that  the  milk  may  not  curdle. 
Thicken  the  sauce  with  the  yolk  of  an  egg,  and  when  about  to  serve 
pour it over the fish.  

No. 53. Baccala in Istufato (Haddock)  

Ingredients:  Haddock  or  lemon  sole,  carrots,  anchovies,  lemon, 
pepper, butter, onions, flour, white wine, stock.  

Stuff  a  haddock  (or  filleted  lemon  sole)  with  some  slices  of  carrot 
which  have  been  masked  with  a  paste  made  of  pounded  anchovies, 
very  little  chopped  lemon  peel,  salt  and  pepper.  Then  fry  an  onion 
with two cuts across it in butter. Take out the onion as soon as it has 
become  a  golden  colour,  flour  the  fish  and  put  it  in  the  butter,  and 
when it has been well fried on both sides pour a glass of Marsala over 
it, and when it is all absorbed add a cup of fowl or veal stock and let it 
simmer for half an hour, then skim and reduce the sauce, pour it over 
the fish and serve.  

 21 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 54. Naselli con Piselli (Whiting)  

Ingredients:  Whiting,  onions,  parsley,  peas,  tomatoes,  butter, 
Parmesan, Bechamel sauce.  

Cut  a  big  whiting  into  two  or  three  pieces  and  fry  them  slightly  in 
butter, add a small bit of onion, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley and 
fry  for  a  few  minutes  more.  Then  add  some  peas  which  have  been 
cooked  in  salted  water,  three  tablespoonsful  of  Bechamel  sauce  (No. 
3),  and  three  of  tomato  puree,  and  cook  all  together  on  a  moderate 
fire.  

No. 55. Ostriche alla Livornese (Oysters)  

Ingredients:  Oysters,  parsley,  shallot,  anchovies,  fennel  pepper, 
bread crumbs, cream, lemon.  

Detach  the  oysters  from  their  shells  and  put  then  into  china  shells 
with  their  own  liquor.  Have  ready  a  dessert-spoonful  of  parsley, 
shallot,  anchovy  and  very  little  fennel,  add  a  tablespoonful  of  bread 
crumbs and a little pepper, and mix the whole with a little cream. Put 
some  of  this  mixture  on  each  oyster  and  then  bake  them  in  a 
moderate  fire  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  At  the  last  minute  add  a 
squeeze of lemon juice to each oyster and serve on a folded napkin.  

No. 56. Ostriche alla Napolitana (Oysters)  

Ingredients:  Oysters,  parsley,  celery,  thyme,  pepper,  garlic,  oil, 
lemon.  

Prepare the oysters as above, but rub each shell with a little garlic. Put 
on  each  oyster  a  mixture  made  of  chopped  parsley,  a  little  thyme, 
pepper, and bread crumbs. Then pour a few drops of oil on each shell, 
put them on the gridiron on an open fire, grill for a few minutes, and 
add a little lemon juice before serving.  

 22 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 57. Ostriche alla Veneziana (Oysters)  

Ingredients: Oysters, butter, shallots, truffles, lemon juice, forcemeat 
of fish.  

Take  several  oysters  out  of  their  shells  and  cook  them  in  butter,  a 
little  chopped  shallot,  and  their  own  liquor,  add  a  little  lemon  juice 
and then put in each of the deeper shells a layer of forcemeat made of 
fish  and  chopped  truffles,  then  an  oyster  or  two,  and  over  this  again 
another  layer  of  the  forcemeat,  cover  up  with  the  top  shell  and  put 
them in a fish kettle and steam them. Then remove the top shell and 
arrange the shells with the oysters on a napkin and serve.  

No. 58. Pesci diversi alla Casalinga (Fish)  

Ingredients:  Any  sort  of  fish,  celery,  parsley,  carrots,  garlic,  onion, 
anchovies,  almonds,  capers,  mushrooms,  butter,  salt,  pepper,  flour, 
tomatoes.  

Chop up a stick of celery, a sprig of parsley, a carrot, an onion. Pound 
up  an  anchovy  in  brine  (well  cleaned,  boned,  and  scaled),  four 
shredded almonds, three capers and two mushrooms. Put all this into 
a saucepan with one ounce of butter, salt and pepper, and fry for a few 
minutes, then add a few spoonsful of hot water and a tablespoonful of 
flour and boil gently for ten minutes, put in the fish and cook it until 
it is done. If you like, you may add a little tomato sauce.  

No. 59. Pesce alla Genovese (Sole or Turbot)  

Ingredients: Fish (sole, mullet, or turbot), butter, salt, onion, garlic, 
carrots,  celery,  parsley,  nutmeg,  pepper,  spice,  mushrooms, 
tomatoes, flour, anchovies.  

Fry an  onion slightly in  one and  a half ounces  of  butter, add a  small 
cut-up  carrot,  half  a  stick  of  celery,  a  sprig  of  parsley,  and  a  salt 
anchovy  (scaled),  which  will  dissolve  in  the  butter.  Into  this  put  the 
fish cut up in pieces, a pinch of spice and pepper, and let it simmer for 

 23 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

a few minutes, then add two cut-up mushrooms, a tomato mashed up, 
and a little flour. Mix all together, and cook for twenty minutes.  

No. 60. Sogliole in Zimino (Sole)  

Ingredients:  Sole,  onion,  beetroot,  butter,  celery,  tomato  sauce  or 
white wine.  

Cut  up  a  small  onion  and  fry  it  slightly  in  one  ounce  of  butter,  then 
add  some  slices  of  beetroot  (well-washed  and  drained),  and  a  little 
celery  cut  up;  to  this  add  fillets  of  sole  or  haddock,  salt  and  pepper. 
Boil  on  a  moderate  on  the  fish  kettle.  When  the  beetroot  is  nearly 
cooked add two tablespoonsful of tomato puree and boil till all is well 
cooked. Instead of the tomato you may use half a glass of Chablis.  

No. 61. Sogliole al tegame (Sole)  

Ingredients:  Sole  (or  mullet),  butter,  anchovies,  parsley,  garlic, 
capers, eggs.  

Put an ounce of butter and an anchovy in a saucepan together with a 
sole or mullet. Fry lightly for a few minutes, then strew a little pepper 
and chopped parsley over it, put in a clove of garlic with one cut, and 
cook  for  half  an  hour,  but  turn  the  fish  over  when  one  side  is 
sufficiently done. A few minutes before taking it off the fire add three 
capers and stir in the yolk  of  an  egg at the last minute. Do  not leave 
the garlic in more than five minutes.  

No. 62. Sogliole alla Livornese (Sole)  

Ingredients: Sole, butter, garlic, pepper, salt, tomatoes, fennel.  

Fillet  a  sole  and  put  it  in  a  saute-pan  with  one  and  a  half  ounces  of 
butter and a clove of garlic with one  cut in it,  then sprinkle  over it a 
little  chopped  fennel,  salt  and  pepper,  and  let  it  cook  for  a  few 
minutes.  Turn  over  the  fillets  w  hen  they  are  sufficiently  cooked  on 

 24 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

one  side,  take  out  the  garlic  and  cover  the  fish  with  a  puree  of 
tomatoes at the last.  

No. 63. Sogliole alla Veneziana (Sole)  

Ingredients:  Sole,  anchovies,  butter,  bacon,  onion,  stock,  Chablis, 
salt, nutmeg, parsley, Spanish olives, one bay leaf.  

Fillet a sole and interlard each piece with a bit of anchovy. Tie up the 
fillets and put them in a saute-pan with two ounces of butter, a slice of 
bacon  or  ham,  and  a  few  small  slices  of  onion.  Cover  half  over  with 
good stock and a glass of Chablis, and add salt, a pinch of nutmeg, a 
bunch of parsley, and a bay leaf. Cover with buttered paper, and cook 
on  a  slow  fire  for  about  an  hour.  Drain  the  fish,  pass  the  liquor 
through a sieve, reduce it to the consistency of a thick sauce, and pour 
it  over  the  fish.  Garnish  each  fillet  with  a  Spanish  olive  stuffed  with 
anchovy.  

No. 64. Sogliole alla Parmigiana (Sole).*  

Ingredients: Sole, Parmesan, butter, cream, cayenne.  

Fillet a sole and wipe each piece with a clean cloth, then place them in 
a  fireproof  dish,  and  put  a  small  piece  of  butter  on  each  fillet.  Then 
make a good white sauce, and mix it with two tablespoonsful of grated 
Parmesan and half a gill of cream. Cover the fish well with the sauce, 
and bake in a moderate oven for twenty minutes.  

*Lemon soles may be used in any of the above-named dishes.  

No. 65. Salmone alla Genovese (Salmon)  

Ingredients: Salmon, Genoese sauce (No. 5), butter, lemon.  

Boil  a  bit  of  salmon,  drain  it,  take  off  the  skin,  and  mask  it  with  a 
Genoese  sauce,  to  which  add  a  spoonful  of  the  water  in  which  the 

 25 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

salmon has been boiled, and at the last add a pat of fresh butter and a 
squeeze of lemon juice.  

No. 66. Salmone alla Perigo (Salmon)  

Ingredients:  Salmon,  forcemeat  of  fish,  truffles,  butter,  Madeira, 
croutons of bread, crayfish tails, anchovy butter.  

Cut  a  bit  of  salmon  into  well  shaped  fillets,  and  marinate  them  in 
lemon  juice  and  a  bunch  of  herbs  for  two  hours,  wipe  them,  put  a 
layer of forcemeat of fish over each, and decorate them with slices of 
truffle. When put them into a well-buttered saute-pan with half a cup 
of stock and a glass of Madeira or Marsala, cover with buttered paper, 
and  put  them  into  a  moderate  oven  for  twenty  minutes.  Arrange  the 
fillets in a circle on croutons of bread, garnish the centre with crayfish 
tails and with truffles cut into dice, a quarter of a pint of Velute sauce 
(No. 2), and half a teaspoonful of anchovy butter. Glaze the fillets and 
serve.  

No. 67. Salmone alla giardiniera (Salmon)  

Ingredients: Salmon, forcemeat of fish, vegetables, butter, Bechamel, 
and Espagnole sauce.  

Prepare the fillets as above (No. 66), and put on each a layer of white 
forcemeat  of  fish.  Cook  a  macedoine  of  vegetables  separately,  and 
garnish  each  fillet  with  some  of  it,  then  cook  them  in  a  covered 
stewpan Put a crouton of bread in an entree dish and garnish it with 
cooked  peas,  mixed  with  Bechamel  sauce  (No.  3),  stock,  and  butter. 
Around  this  place  the  fillets  of  fish,  leaving  the  centre  with  the  peas 
uncovered.  Pour  some  rich  Espagnole  sauce  (No.  1)  round  the  fillets 
and serve.  

 26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 68. Salmone alla Farnese (Salmon)  

Ingredients:  Salmon,  oil,  lemon  juice,  thyme,  salt,  pepper,  nutmeg, 
mayonnaise  sauce,  lobster  butter,  gelatine,  Velute  sauce,  olives, 
anchovy butter, white truffles, mushrooms in oil, crayfish.  

Boil a piece of salmon, and when cold cut it into fillets and marinate 
them  for  two  hours  in  oil,  lemon  juice,  salt,  thyme  pepper,  and 
nutmeg.  Then  make  a  good  mayonnaise  and  add  to  it  some  lobster 
butter mixed with a little dissolved gelatine and Velute sauce (No. 2). 
Wipe the fillets  and arrange them in  a circle  on  a dish,  and pour the 
mayonnaise  over  them.  Then  decorate  the  border  of  the  dish  with 
aspic  jelly,  and  in  the  centre  put  some  stoned  Spanish  olives  stuffed 
with anchovy butter, truffles, mushrooms in oil, and crayfish tails.  

No. 69. Salmone alla Santa Fiorentina (Salmon)  

Ingredients: Salmon, eggs, mayonnaise, parsley, flour.  

Marinate a piece of boiled salmon for an hour; take out the bone and 
cut the fish into fillets, wipe them, roll them in flour and dip them in 
eggs  beaten  up  or  in  mayonnaise  sauce,  and  fry  them  a  good  colour. 
Arrange  in  a  circle  on  the  dish,  garnish  with  fried  parsley,  and  serve 
with Dutch or mayonnaise sauce. Any fillets of fish may be cooked in 
this manner.  

No. 70. Salmone alla Francesca (Salmon)  

Ingredients:  Salmon,  butter,  onions,  parsley,  salt,  pepper,  nutmeg, 
stock,  Chablis,  Espagnole  sauce  (No.1)  mushrooms,  anchovy  butter, 
lemon.  

Put a firm piece of salmon in a stewpan with one and a half ounces of 
butter, an onion cut up, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley (blanched), 
salt, pepper, very little nutmeg, a cup of stock, and a glass of Chablis. 
Cook  for  half  an  hour  over  a  hot  fire,  turn  the  salmon  occasionally, 
and  if  it  gets  dry,  add  a  cup  of  Espagnole  sauce.  Let  it  boil  until 
sufficiently cooked, and then put it on a dish. Into the sauce put four 

 27 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

mushrooms  cooked  in  white  sauce,  half  a  teaspoonful  of  anchovy 
butter  and  a  little  lemon  juice.  Pour  the  sauce  over  the  salmon  and 
serve.  

No. 71. Fillets of Salmon in Papiliotte  

Ingredients: Salmon, oil, lemon juice, salt, pepper, nutmeg, herbs.  

Cut  a  piece  of  salmon  into  fillets,  marinate  them  in  oil,  lemon  juice, 
salt,  pepper,  nutmeg,  and  herbs  for  two  hours.  Wipe  and  put  them 
into paper souffle cases with a little oil, butter, and herbs. Cook them 
on a gridiron, and serve with a sauce piquante made in the following 
manner:  Half  a  pint  of  rich  Espagnole  sauce  (No.  1)  and  a  dessert-
spoonful of New Century sauce, warmed up in a bain-marie.  

BEEF, MUTTON, VEAL, LAMB  

No. 72. Manzo alla Certosina (Fillet of Beef)  

Ingredients:  Fillet  of  beef  or  rump  steak,  bacon,  olive  oil,  salt, 
nutmeg, anchovies, herbs, stock, garlic.  

Put  a piece of very tender rump steak  or fillet of beef into a stewpan 
with two slices of fat bacon and three teaspoonsful of the finest olive 
oil; season with salt and a tiny pinch of nutmeg; let it cook uncovered, 
and  turn  the  meat  over  occasionally.  When  it  is  nicely  browned  add 
an anchovy minced and mixed with chopped herbs, and a small clove 
of garlic with one cut across it. Then cover the whole with good stock, 
put  the  cover  on  the  stewpan,  and  when  it  is  all  sufficiently  cooked, 
skim the grease off the sauce, pass it through a sieve, and pour it over 
the beef. Leave the garlic in for five minutes only.  

 28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 73. Stufato alla Florentina (Stewed Beef)  

Ingredients:  Beef,  mutton,  or  veal,  onions,  rosemary,  Burgundy, 
tomatoes, stock, potatoes, butter, garlic.  

Cut up an onion and three leaves of rosemary, fry them slightly in an 
ounce  of  butter,  then  add  meat  (beef,  mutton,  or  veal),  cut  into  fair-
sized  pieces,  salt  it  and  fry  it  a  little,  then  pour  half  a  glass  of 
Burgundy over it, and add two tablespoonsful of tomato conserve, or 
better still, fresh tomatoes in a puree. Cover up the stewpan and cook 
gently, stir occasionally, and add some stock if the stew gets too dry. 
If you like to add potatoes, cut them up, put them in the stewpan an 
hour  before  serving,  and  cook  them  with  the  meat.  A  clove  of  garlic 
with one cut may be added for five minutes.  

No. 74. Coscia di Manzo al Forno (Rump Steak)  

Ingredients: Rump steak, ham, salt, pepper, spice, fat bacon, onion, 
stock, white wine.  

Lard  a  bit  of  good  rump  steak  with  bits  of  lean  ham,  and  season  it 
with salt, pepper, and a little spice, slightly brown it in butter for a few 
minutes, then cover it with three or four slices of fat bacon and put it 
into  a  stewpan  with  an  onion  chopped  up,  a  cup  of  good  stock,  and 
half  a  glass  of  white  wine;  cook  with  the  cover  on  the  stewpan  for 
about an hour. You may add a clove of garlic for ten minutes.  

No. 75. Polpettine alla Salsa Piccante (Beef Olives)  

Ingredients: Beef steak, butter, onions, stock, sausage meat.  

Cut some thin slices of beef steak, and on each place a little forcemeat 
of fowl or veal, to which add a little sausage meat: roll up the slices of 
beef  and  cook  them  with  butter  and  onions,  and  when  they  are  well 
browned  pour  some  stock  over  them,  and  let  them  absorb  it.  Serve 
with a tomato sauce (No. 10), or sauce piquante made with a quarter 
of  a  pint  of  rich  Espagnole  (No.  1),  and  a  dessert-spoonful  of  New 
Century sauce.  

 29 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 76. Stufato alla Milanese (Stewed Beef)  

Ingredients:  Rump  steak,  bacon,  ham,  salt,  pepper,  cinnamon, 
cloves, butter, onions, Burgundy.  

Beat  a  piece  of  rump  steak  to  make  it  tender  and  lard  it  well,  cut  up 
some  bits  of  fat  bacon  and  dust  them  over  with  salt,  pepper,  and  a 
tiny pinch of cinnamon, and put them on the steak. Stick three cloves 
into the steak, then put it into a stewpan, add a little of the fat of the 
beef chopped up, an ounce of butter, an onion cut up, and some  bits 
of lean ham. Put in sufficient stock  to  cover the steak,  add a glass  of 
Burgundy, and stew gently until it is cooked.  

No. 77. Manzo Marinato Arrosto (Marinated Beef)  

Ingredients:  Beef,  salt,  larding  bacon,  Burgundy,  vinegar,  spices, 
herbs, flour.  

Beat a piece of rump steak, or fillet to make it tender; sprinkle it well 
with salt and some chopped herbs, and leave it for an hour; then lard 
it  and  marinate  it  as  follows:  Half  a  pint  of  red  wine  (Australian 
Harvest  Burgundy  is  best),  half  a  glass  of  vinegar,  a  pinch  of  spice, 
and  a  bouquet  of  herbs;  leave  it  in  this  for  twenty-four  hours  then 
take it out, drain it well sprinkle it with flour, and roast it for twenty 
minutes  before  a  clear  fire,  braize  it  till  quite  tender,  then  press  and 
glaze  it.  The  thin  end  of  a  sirloin  is  excellent  cooked  this  way.  Serve 
cold.  

No. 78. Manzo con sugo di Barbabietole (Fillet of Beef)  

Ingredients: Beef, beetroot, salt.  

Cut  up  three  raw  beetroots  put  them  into  an  earthen  ware  pot  and 
cover  them  with  water.  Keep  them  in  some  warm  place,  and  allow 
them  to  ferment  for  five,  six,  or  eight  days  according  to  the  season; 
the  froth  at  the  top  of  the  water  will  indicate  the  necessary 
fermentation.  The  take  out  the  pieces  of  beetroot,  skim  off  all  the 

 30 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

froth, and into the fermented liquor put a good piece of tender rump 
steak or fillet with some salt. Braize for four hours and serve.  

No. 79. Manzo in Insalata (Marinated Beef)  

Ingredients:  Beef,  oil,  salt,  pepper,  vinegar,  parsley,  capers, 
mushrooms, olives, vegetables.  

Cook  a  fillet  of  beef  (or  the  thin  end  of  a  sirloin),  which  has  been 
previously  marinated  for  two  days  in  oil,  salt,  pepper,  vinegar,  and 
chopped parsley. When cold press and glaze it, garnish it with capers, 
mushrooms preserved in vinegar or gherkins, olives, and any kind of 
vegetables marinated like the beef. Serve cold.  

No.  80.  Filetto  di  Bue  con  Pistacchi  (Fillets  of  Beef  with 
Pistacchios)  

Ingredients: Fillet of beef, oil, salt, flour, pistacchio nuts, gravy.  

Cut  a  piece  of  tender  beef  into  little  fillets,  and  put  a  them  in  a 
stewpan  with  a  tablespoonful  of  olive  oil  and  salt.  After  they  have 
cooked  for  a  few  minutes,  powder  them  with  flour,  and  strew  over 
each fillet some chopped pistacchio nuts. Add a few spoonsful of very 
good boiling gravy, and cook for another half-hour.  

No. 81. Scalopini di Riso (Beef with Risotto)  

Ingredients:  Rump  steak,  butter,  rice,  truffles,  tongue,  stock, 
mushrooms.  

Slightly stew a bit of rump steak with bits of tongue and mushrooms; 
let it get  cold,  and cut  it into  scallops.  Butter  a pie dish, and garnish 
the bottom of it with cooked tongue and slices of cooked truffle, then 
over  this  put  a  layer  of  well-cooked  and  seasoned  risotto  (No.  190), 
then a layer of the scallops of beef, and then another layer of risotto. 
Heat  in  a  bain-marie,  and  turn  out  of  the  pie  dish,  and  serve  with  a 
very good sauce poured round it.  

 31 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 82. Tenerumi alla Piemontese (Tendons of Veal)  

Ingredients:  Tendons  of  veal,  fowl  forcemeat,  truffles,  risotto  (No. 
190), a cock's comb, tongue.  

Tendons  of  veal  are  that  part  of  the  breast  which  lies  near  the  ribs, 
and forms an opaque gristly substance. Partly braize a fine bit of this 
joint,  and  press  it  between  two  plates  till  cold.  Cut  it  up  into  fillets, 
and on each spread a thin layer of fowl forcemeat, and decorate with 
slices  of  truffle.  Put  the  fillets  into  a  stewpan,  cover  them  with  very 
good  stock,  and  boil  till  the  forcemeat  and  truffles  are  quite  cooked. 
Prepare a risotto all'Italiana (No. 190), put it on a dish and decorate it 
with bits of red tongue cut into shapes, and in the centre put a whole 
cooked truffle and a white cock's comb, both on a silver skewer. Place 
the tendons of veal round the dish. Add a good Espagnole sauce (No. 
1) and serve.  

If  you  like,  leave  out  the  risotto  and  serve  the  veal  with  Espagnole 
sauce mixed with cooked peas and chopped truffle.  

No. 83. Bragiuole di Vitello (Veal Cutlets)  

Ingredients: Veal, salt, pepper, butter, bacon, carrots, flour, Chablis, 
water, lemon.  

Cut  a  bit  of  veal  steak  into  pieces  the  size  of  small  cutlets,  salt  and 
pepper them, and put them in a wide low stewpan. Add two ounces of 
butter, a cut-up carrot, and some bits of bacon also cut up. When they 
are browned, add a spoonful of flour, half a glass of Chablis, and half 
a glass of water, and cook on a slow fire for half an hour, then take out 
the cutlets, reduce the sauce, and  pass it through a sieve. Put it back 
on the fire and add an ounce of butter and a good squeeze of lemon, 
and when hot pour it over the cutlets.  

 32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 84. Costolette alla Manza (Veal Cutlets)  

Ingredients: Veal cutlets (fowl or turkey cutlets), forcemeat, truffles, 
mushrooms, tongue, parsley, pasta marinate (No. 17).  

Cut a few horizontal lines along your cutlets, and on each put a little 
veal  or  fowl  forcemeat,  to  which  add  in  equal  quantities  chopped 
truffles, tongue, mushrooms, and a little parsley. Over this put a thin 
layer of pasta marinate, and fry the cutlets on a slow fire.  

No. 85. Vitello alla Pellegrina (Breast of Veal)  

Ingredients:  Breast  of  veal,  butter,  onions,  sugar,  stock,  red  wine, 
mushrooms, bacon, salt, flour, bay leaf.  

Roast a bit of breast of veal, then glaze over two Spanish onions with 
butter  and  a  little  sugar,  and  when  they  are  a  good  colour  pour  a 
teacup  of  stock  and  a  glass  of  Burgundy  over  them,  and  add  a  few 
mushrooms, a bay leaf, some salt, and a few bits of bacon. When the 
mushrooms  and  onions  are  cooked,  skim  off  the  fat  and  thicken  the 
sauce with a little flour and butter fried together; pour it over the veal 
and put the onions and mushrooms round the dish.  

No. 86. Frittura Piccata al Marsala (Fillet of Veal)  

Ingredients: Veal, butter, Marsala, stock, lemon, bacon.  

Cut  a  tender  bit  of  veal  steak  into  small  fillets,  cut  off  all  the  fat  and 
stringy  parts,  flour  them  and  fry  them  in  butter.  When  they  are 
slightly  browned  add  a  glass  of  Marsala  and  a  teacup  of  good  stock, 
and fry on a very hot fire, so that the fillets may remain tender. Take 
them off the fire, put a little roll of fried bacon on each, add a squeeze 
of lemon juice, and serve.  

No. 87. Polpettine Distese (Veal Olives)  

Ingredients:  Veal  steak,  butter,  bread,  eggs,  pistacchio  nuts,  spice, 
parsley.  

 33 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Cut  some  slices  of  veal  steak  very  thin  as  for  veal  olives,  and  spread 
them out in  a well-buttered stewpan.  On each slice  of veal put half a 
spoonful  of  the  following  mixture:  Pound  some  crumb  of  bread  and 
mix it with a whole egg; add a little salt, some pistacchio nuts, herbs, 
and parsley chopped up, and a little butter. Roll up each slice of veal, 
cover  with  a  sheet  of  buttered  paper,  put  the  cover  on  the  stewpan 
and  cook  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour  in  two  ounces  of  butter  on  a 
slow  fire.  Thicken  the  sauce  with  a  dessert-spoonful  of  flour  and 
butter fried together.  

No. 88. Coste di Vitello Imboracciate (Ribs of Veal)  

Ingredients:  Ribs  of  veal,  butter,  eggs,  Parmesan,  bread  crumbs, 
parsley.  

Cut all the sinews from a piece of neck or ribs of veal, cover the meat 
with plenty of butter and half cook it on a slow fire, then let it get cold. 
When cold, egg it over and roll it in bread crumbs mixed with a 
tablespoonful of grated Parmesan; fry in butter and serve with a 
garnish of fried parsley and a rich sauce. A dessert-spoonful of New 
Century sauce mixed with quarter of a pint of good thick stock makes 
a good sauce. (See No. 226.)  

No. 89. Costolette di Montone alla Nizzarda (Mutton 
Cutlets)  

Ingredients: Mutton cutlets, butter, olives, mushrooms, cucumbers.  

Trim  as  many  cutlets  as  you  require,  and  marinate  them  in  vinegar, 
herbs,  and  spice  for  two  hours.  Before  cooking  wipe  them  well  and 
then  saute  them  in  clarified  butter,  and  when  they  are  well  coloured 
on both sides and resist the pressure of the finger, drain off the butter 
and  pour  four  tablespoonsful  of  Espagnole  sauce  (No.  1)  with  a 
teaspoonful  of  vinegar  and  six  bruised  pepper  corns  over  them. 
Arrange  them  on  a  dish,  putting  between  each  cutlet  a  crouton  of 

 34 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

fried bread, and garnish with olives stuffed with chopped mushrooms 
and with slices of fried cucumber.  

No. 90. Petto di Castrato all'Italiana (Breast of Mutton)  

Ingredients:  Breast  of  mutton,  veal,  forcemeat,  eggs,  herbs,  spice, 
Parmesan.  

Stuff  a  breast  of  mutton  with  veal  forcemeat  mixed  with  two  eggs 
beaten  up,  herbs,  a  little  spice,  and  a  tablespoonful  of  grated 
Parmesan,  braize  it  in  stock  with  a  bunch  of  herbs  and  two  onions. 
Serve with Italian sauce (No. 6).  

No. 91. Petto di Castrato alla Salsa piccante (Breast of 
Mutton)  

Ingredients: Same as No. 90.  

When the breast of mutton has been stuffed and cooked as above, let 
it  get  cold  and  then  cut  it  into  fillets,  flour  them  over,  fry  in  butter, 
and  serve  with  tomato  sauce  piquante  (No.  10),  or  one  dessert-
spoonful  of  New  Century  sauce  in  a  quarter  pint  of  good  stock  or 
gravy.  

No. 92. Tenerumi d'Agnello alla Villeroy (Tendons of Lamb)  

Ingredients:  Tendons  of  lamb,  eggs,  bread  crumbs,  truffles,  butter, 
stock, Villeroy sauce.  

Slightly  cook  the  tendons  (the  part  of  the  breast  near  the  ribs)  of 
lamb,  press  them  between  two  dishes  till  cold,  then  cut  into  a  good 
shape  and  dip  them  into  a  Villeroy  sauce  (No.  18)  egg  and  bread-
crumb, and saute them in butter. When about to serve, put them in a 
dish with very good clear gravy. A teaspoonful of chopped mint and a 
tablespoonful of chopped truffles mixed with the bread crumbs will be 
a great improvement.  

 35 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No.  93.  Tenerumi  d'  Agnello  alla  Veneziana  (Tendons  of 
Lamb)  

Ingredients: Tendons of lamb, butter, parsley, onions, stock.  

Fry  the  tendons  of  lamb  in  butter  together  with  a  teaspoonful  of 
chopped parsley and an onion. Serve with good gravy.  

No. 94. Costolette d' Agnello alla Costanza (Lamb Cutlets)  

Ingredients:  Lamb  cutlets,  butter,  stock,  cocks'  combs,  fowl's  liver, 
mushrooms.  

Fry as many lamb cutlets as you require very sharply in butter, drain 
off the butter and replace it with some very good stock or gravy. Make 
a  ragout  of  cocks'  combs,  bits  of  fowl's  liver  and  mushrooms  all  cut 
up; add a white sauce with half a gill of cream mixed with it, and with 
this mask the cutlets, and saute them for fifteen minutes.  

TONGUE,  SWEETBREAD,  CALF'S  HEAD,  LIVER, 
SUCKLING PIG  

No. 95. Timballo alla Romana  

Ingredients:  Cold  fowl,  game,  or  sweetbread,  butter,  lard,  flour, 
Parmesan, truffles, macaroni, onions, cream.  

Make  a  light  paste  of  two  ounces  of  butter,  two  of  lard,  and  half  a 
pound of flour, and put it in the larder for two hours. In the meantime 
boil a little macaroni and let it get cold, then line a plain mould with 
the paste, and fill it with bits of cut-up fowl, or game, or sweetbread, 
bits of truffle cut in small dice, grated Parmesan, and a little chopped 
onion.  Put  these  ingredients  in  alternately,  and  after  each  layer  add 

 36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

enough  cream  to  moisten.  Fill  the  mould  quite  full,  then  roll  out  a 
thin  paste  for  the  top  and  press  it  well  together  at  the  edges  to  keep 
the  cream  from  boiling  out.  Bake  it  in  a  moderate  oven  for  an  hour 
and  a  half,  turn  it  out  of  the  mould,  and  serve  with  a  rich  brown 
sauce.  Decorate  the  top  with  bits  of  red  tongue  and  truffles  cut  into 
shapes or with a little chopped pistacchio nut.  

No. 96. Timballo alla Lombarda  

Ingredients: Macaroni, fowl or game, eggs, stock, Velute sauce (No. 
2), tongue, butter, truffles.  

Butter a smooth mould, then boil some macaroni, but take care that it 
is in long pieces. When cold, take the longest bits and line the bottom 
of the mould, making the macaroni go in circles; and when you come 
to the end of one piece, join on the next as closely as possible until the 
whole  mould  is  lined;  paint  it  over  now  and  then  with  white  of  egg 
beaten up; then mask the whole inside with a thin layer of forcemeat 
of  fowl,  which  should  also  be  put  on  with  white  of  egg  to  make  it 
adhere;  then  cut  up  the  bits  of  macaroni  which  remain,  warm  them 
up  in  some  good  fowl  stock  and  Velute  sauce  much  reduced,  a  little 
melted butter, some bits of truffle cut into dice, tongue, fowl, or game 
also cut up in pieces. When the mould is full, put on another layer of 
forcemeat,  steam  for  an  hour,  then  turn  out  and  serve  with  a  very 
good brown sauce.  

No. 97. Lingua alla Visconti (Tongue)  

Ingredients: Tongue, glaze, bread, spinach, white grapes, port.  

Soak a smoked tongue in fresh water for forty-eight hours, then boil it 
till it is tender. Peel off the skin, cut the tongue in rather thick slices, 
and  glaze  them.  Prepare  an  oval  border  of  fried  bread,  cover  it  with 
spinach  about  two  inches  thick,  and  on  this  arrange  the  slices  of 
tongue. Fill in the centre of the dish with white grapes cooked in port 
or muscat.  

 37 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 98. Lingua di Manzo al Citriuoli (Tongue with 
Cucumber)  

Ingredients:  Ox  tongue,  salt,  pepper,  nutmeg,  parsley,  bacon,  veal, 
carrots, onions, thyme, bay leaves, cloves, stock.  

Gently boil an ox tongue until you can peel off the skin, then lard it, 
season it with salt, pepper, nutmeg, and chopped parsley, and  boil it 
with some bits of bacon, ham, veal, a carrot, an onion, two bay leaves, 
thyme and two cloves. Pour some good stock over it and let it simmer 
gently until it is cooked. Put the tongue on a dish and garnish it with 
slices  of  fried  cucumber.  Boil  the  cucumber  for  five  minutes  before 
you fry it, to take away the bitter taste. Serve the tongue with a sauce 
piquante, made with one dessert-spoonful of New Century sauce to a 
quarter pint of good Espangole sauce (No. 1).  

No. 99. Lingue di Castrato alla Cuciniera (Sheep's Tongues)  

Ingredients: Sheep's tongues, bacon, beef, onions, herbs, spice, eggs, 
butter, flour.  

Cook three or four sheep's tongues in good stock, and add some slices 
of  bacon,  bits  of  beef,  two  onions,  a  bunch  of  herbs,  and  a  pinch  of 
spice.  Let  them  get  cold,  flour  them  and  mask  them  with  egg  beaten 
up and fry quickly in butter. Serve with Italian sauce (No. 6)  

No. 100. Lingue di Vitello all'Italiana (Calves' Tongues)  

Ingredients:  Calves'  tongues,  salt,  butter,  stock,  water,  glaze, 
potatoes, ham, truffles, sauce piquante.  

Rub a good handful of salt into two or three calves' tongues and leave 
them for twenty-four hours, then wash off all the salt and soak them 
in fresh water for two hours. Stew them gently till tender, take them 
out,  skin  and  braize  them  in  butter  and  good  stock  for  half  an  hour. 
Let  them  get  cold  and  cut  them  into  slices  about  half  an  inch  thick; 
put  the  slices  into  a  buttered  saute-pan  and  cover  them  with  a  good 
thick glaze; let them get quite hot and then arrange them on a border 

 38 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

of potatoes, and garnish each slice with round shapes of cooked ham 
and  truffle.  Fill  the  centre  with  any  vegetables  you  like;  fried 
cucumber is excellent, but if you use it do not forget to boil it for five 
minutes  before  you  fry  it  to  take  away  the  bitter  taste.  Serve  with  a 
sauce piquante (No. 10, or No. 226).  

No. 101. Porcelletto alla Corradino (Suckling Pig)  

truffles, 
Ingredients:  Suckling  pig,  ham,  eggs,  Parmesan, 
mushrooms, garlic, bay leaves, coriander seeds, pistacchio nuts, veal 
forcemeat, suet, bacon, herbs, spice.  

Bone  a  Suckling  pig,  remove  all  the  inside  and  fill  it  with  a  stuffing 
made of veal forcemeat mixed with a little chopped suet, ham, bacon, 
herbs,  two  tablespoonsful  of  finely  chopped  pistacchio  nuts,  a  pinch 
of spice, six coriander seeds, two tablespoonsful of grated Parmesan, 
cuttings of truffles and mushrooms all bound together with eggs. Sew 
the pig up and braize it in a big stewpan with bits of bacon, a clove of 
garlic  with  two  cuts,  a  bunch  of  herbs  and  one  bay  leaf,  for  half  an 
hour. Then pour off the gravy, cover the pig with well-buttered paper, 
and finish cooking it in the oven. Garnish the top with vegetables and 
truffles  cut  into  shapes,  slices  of  lemon  and  sprigs  of  parsley.  Serve 
with  a  good  sauce  piquante  (No.  229).  Do  not  leave  the  garlic  in  for 
more than ten minutes.  

No. 102. Porcelletto da Latte in Galantina (Suckling Pig)  

Ingredients:  Suckling  pig,  forcemeat  of  fowl,  bacon,  truffles, 
pistacchio  nuts,  ham,  lemon,  veal,  bay  leaves,  salt,  carrots,  onions, 
shallots, parsley, stock, Chablis, gravy.  

Bone  a  Suckling  pig  all  except  its  feet,  but  be  careful  not  to  cut  the 
skin  on  its  back.  Lay  it  out  on  a  napkin  and  line  it  inside  with  a 
forcemeat of fowl and veal about an inch thick, over this put a layer of 
bits of marinated bacon, slices of truffle, pistacchio nuts, cooked ham, 
and some of the flesh of the pig, then another layer of forcemeat until 
the  pig's  skin  is  fairly  filled.  Keep  its  shape  by  sewing  it  lightly 

 39 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

together, then rub it all over with lemon juice and cover it with slices 
of  fat  bacon,  roll  it  up  and  stitch  it  in  a  pudding  cloth.  Then  put  the 
bones  and  cuttings  into  a  stewpan  with  bits  of  bacon  and  veal  steak 
cut up, two bay leaves, salt, a carrot, an onion, a shallot, and a bunch 
of  parsley.  Into  this  put  the  pig  with  a  bottle  of  white  wine  and 
sufficient  stock  to  cover  it,  and  cook  on  a  slow  fire  for  three  hours. 
Then  take  it  out,  and  when  cold  take  off  the  pudding-cloth.  Pass  the 
liquor through a hair sieve, and, if necessary, add some stock; reduce 
and clarify it. Decorate the dish with this jelly and serve cold.  

No. 103. Ateletti alla Sarda  

Ingredients:  Veal  or  fowl,  ox  palates,  stock,  tongue,  truffles,  butter, 
mushrooms, sweetbread.  

Soak  two  ox  palates  in  salted  water  for  four  hours,  then  boil  them 
until  the  rough  skin  comes  off,  and  cook  them  in  good  stock  for  six 
hours,  press  them  between  two  plates  and  let  them  get  cold.  Roll 
some forcemeat of veal or fowl in flour, cut it into small pieces about 
the size of a cork, boil them in salted water, let them get cold and cut 
them into circular pieces.  Cut the ox palates  also into  circular pieces 
the same size as the  bits of forcemeat,  then thinner circles of cooked 
tongue  and  truffles.  String  these  pieces  alternately  on  small  silver 
skewers. Reduce to half its quantity a pint of Velute sauce (No. 2), and 
add  the  cuttings  of  the  truffles,  mushroom  trimmings,  bits  of 
sweetbread,  and  a  squeeze  of  lemon  juice.  Let  it  get  cold  and  then 
mask the atelets (or skewers with the forcemeat, &c.) with it, and fry 
them  quickly  in  butter.  Fry  a  large  oval  crouton  of  bread,  scoop  out 
the centre and fill it with fried  slices  of cucumber  and truffles boiled 
in  a  little  Chablis.  Stick  the  skewers  into  the  crouton  and  pour  the 
sauce round it.  

For  a  maigre  dish  use  fillets  of  fish,  truffles,  mushrooms,  and 
Bechamel  sauce  (No.  3).  The  cucumber  should  be  boiled  for  five 
minutes before it is fried.  

 40 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 104. Ateletti alla Genovese  

Ingredients: Veal, sweetbread, calf's brains, ox palates, mushrooms, 
fonds d'artichauds, cocks' combs, eggs, Parmesan, bread crumbs.  

Cook two ox palates as in the last recipe, then take equal quantities of 
veal  steak,  sweetbread,  calf's  brains,  equal  quantities  of  mushrooms, 
fonds  d'artichauds,  and  cocks'  combs.  Fry  them  all  in  butter  except 
the palates, but be careful to put the veal in first, as it requires longer 
cooking;  the  brains  should  go  in  last.  Then  put  all  these  ingredients 
on a cutting board and add the palates (cooked separately); cut them 
all  into  pieces  of  equal  size,  either  round  or  square,  but  keep  the 
ingredients separate, and string them alternately on silver skewers, as 
in  the  last  recipe.  Then  pound  up  all  the  cuttings  and  add  a  little 
crumb of bread soaked in stock, the yolks of three eggs, the whites of 
two well beaten up, two dessert-spoonsful of grated Parmesan, salt to 
taste,  and  chopped  truffles.  Mix  all  this  well  together  and  mask  the 
atelets  with  it;  egg  and  bread  crumb  them  and  fry  in  butter.  When 
they are a good colour, serve with fried parsley.  

No. 105. Testa di Vitello alla Sorrentina (Calf's Head)  

Ingredients:  Calf's  head,  veal,  sweetbread,  truffles,  mushrooms, 
pistacchio nuts, eggs, herbs, spice, stock, bacon, ham.  

Boil a half calf's head well, and when it is half cold, bone it and fill it 
with  a  stuffing  of  veal,  the  calf's  brains,  sweetbread,  truffles, 
mushrooms, pistacchio nuts, the yolks of two eggs, herbs, and a little 
spice. Then stitch it up and braize it in good stock, with some slices of 
bacon, ham, and a bunch of herbs. Serve with brain sauce mixed with 
cream.  

No. 106. Testa di Vitello con Salsa Napoletana (Calf's Head)  

Ingredients:  Calf's  head,  calf's  liver,  bacon,  suet,  truffles,  almonds, 
olives, calf's brains, capers, spice, coriander seeds, herbs, ham, stock.  

 41 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

Boil half a calf's head,  bone it and fill it with a  stuffing made of four 
ounces of calf's liver, well chopped up and pounded in a mortar; two 
ounces of bacon, one ounce of suet, three truffles, six almonds, three 
olives,  six  coriander  seeds,  six  capers,  the  calf's  brains,  a  pinch  of 
spice  and a teaspoonful of chopped herbs. Roll up the head, tie it  up 
and put it into a stewpan with some bits of bacon, ham, and very good 
stock, and stew it slowly. Serve with Neapolitan sauce (No.12), or with 
tomato sauce piquante (No. 10).  

No. 107. Testa di Vitello alla Pompadour (Calf's Head)  

Ingredients:  Calf's  head,  calf's  brains,  cream,  eggs,  truffles, 
cinnamon, stock, butter, Parmesan.  

Boil and bone half a calf's head and fill it with a stuffing made of the 
calf's brains, a gill of cream, the yolks of two eggs, two truffles cut up, 
a  little  chopped  ham,  and  a  tiny  pinch  of  cinnamon.  Boil  it  in  good 
stock,  and  when  it  is  sufficiently  cooked  take  it  out  and  mask  it  all 
over  with  a  mixture  of  butter,  yolk  of  egg,  and  a  tablespoonful  of 
grated Parmesan, then brown it in the oven and serve hot.  

No. 108. Testa di Vitello alla Sanseverino (Calf's Head)  

Ingredients:  Calf's  head,  sweetbread,  fowl's  liver,  anchovies,  herbs, 
capers, garlic, bacon, ham, Malmsey or Muscat.  

Boil and bone half a calf's head, and fill it with a stuffing made of half 
a pound of sweetbread, a fowl's liver, two anchovies, a teaspoonful of 
chopped  herbs,  a  few  chopped  capers,  and  the  calf's  brains.  Roll  the 
head up, stitch it together and braize it in half a tumbler of Malmsey 
or  Australian  Muscat  (Burgoyne's),  half  a  cup  of  very  good  white 
stock, some bits of ham and bacon, and a clove of garlic with two cuts. 
Cook it gently for four hours and serve it with  its  own  sauce.  Do not 
leave the garlic in longer than ten minutes.  

 42 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 109. Testa di Vitello in Frittata (Calf's Head)  

Ingredients:  Calf's  head,  eggs,  Parmesan,  ham,  pepper,  butter, 
croutons.  

A good rechauffe' of calf's head may be made in the following manner: 
After the head has been well boiled in good stock, cut it into slices and 
mask  these  with  a  mixture  of  eggs  well  beaten  up,  grated  Parmesan, 
pepper,  and  chopped  ham.  Fry  in  butter,  and  garnish  with  fried 
parsley and fried croutons. Serve with a sauce made of a quarter of a 
pint of good Bechamel (No. 3) and a dessert-spoonful of New Century 
sauce.  

No. 110. Zampetti (Calves' Feet)  

Ingredients:  Calves'  or  pigs'  feet,  butter,  leeks  or  small  onions, 
parsley, salt, pepper, stock, tomatoes, eggs, cheese, cinnamon.  

Blanch and bone two or more calves' or pigs' feet and put them into a 
stewpan  with  butter,  leeks,  or  onions,  chopped  parsley,  salt,  pepper, 
and  a  little  stock.  Let  them  boil  till  the  liquid  is  somewhat  reduced, 
then  add  good  meat  gravy  and  two  tablespoonsful  of  tomato  puree, 
and  just  before  taking  the  stewpan  off  the  fire,  add  the  yolks  of  two 
eggs beaten up, a tablespoonful of grated cheese, and a tiny pinch of 
cinnamon. Mix all well together and serve very hot.  

No. 111. Bodini Marinati  

Ingredients:  Veal  forcemeat,  truffles,  sweetbread,  mushrooms, 
herbs, flour, pasta marinate (No. 17), tongue, butter.  

Make  a  mixture  of  truffles,  tongue,  sweetbread,  mushrooms,  and 
herbs,  all  chopped  up,  and  add  it  to  a  forcemeat  of  veal,  the 
proportions being two-thirds veal forcemeat and the other ingredients 
one third. Mix this well and form it into little balls about the size of a 
pigeon's egg, flour them and mask them all over with pasta marinate 
(No. 17). Fry them in butter over a slow fire, so that the balls may be 

 43 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

well cooked through, and when they are the right colour dry them in a 
napkin and serve very hot.  

These bodini may be made with various ingredients; they will be most 
delicate with a forcemeat of fowl and bits of brain mixed with herbs, 
truffle, cooked ham, or tongue. They are also excellent made with fish 
(sole,  mullet,  turbot,  &c.),  either  cooked  or  raw,  and  marinated  in 
lemon, salt, pepper, oil, nutmeg, and parsley.  

No. 112. Animelle alla Parmegiana (Sweetbread)  

Ingredients: Sweetbread, bread crumbs, Parmesan, butter.  

Blanch  as  many  sweetbreads  as  you  require,  and  then  roll  them  in 
bread  crumbs  mixed  with  grated  Parmesan,  salt,  and  pepper;  wrap 
them up in buttered grease-proof paper and grill them. When they are 
cooked,  take  off  the  paper,  and  serve  with  a  good  sauce  in  a  sauce-
boat.  

No. 113. Animelle in Cartoccio (Sweetbread)  

Ingredients:  Sweetbread,  butter,  herbs,  salt,  pepper,  bread  crumbs, 
Parmesan, lemons, gravy, tomatoes.  

Blanch  a  pound  of  sweetbread  cuttings,  mix  it  with  two  ounces  of 
melted butter, chopped herbs, salt, and pepper, and put it into paper 
souffle  cases.  Then  strew  over  each  some  bread  crumbs  mixed  with 
grated  Parmesan,  put  the  cases  in  the  oven,  and  when  they  are 
browned serve either with good gravy and lemon juice or with tomato 
sauce (No. 9).  

No. 114. Animelle all'Italiana (Sweetbread)  

Ingredients:  Sweetbread,  butter,  onions,  salt,  herbs,  eggs,  glaze, 
Risotto (No. 190), truffles, quenelles of fowl, Espagnole sauce, white 
sauce.  

 44 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Blanch  as  many  sweetbreads  as  you  require,  cut  them  into  quarters 
and saute them in butter with a small onion cut up, salt, and a bunch 
of  herbs.  Then  pour  over  them  two  cups  of  white  sauce  and  cook 
gently for twenty minutes; take out the sweetbreads and put them in a 
stewpan. Reduce the sauce, and add to it a mixture made of the yolks 
of four eggs, one and a half ounce of butter and a teaspoonful of glaze; 
pass  it through a sieve,  pour it  over the sweetbreads,  and keep them 
warm  in  a  bain-marie.  Have  ready  a  good  Risotto  all'Italiana  (No. 
190), and put it into  a  border mould (but first  decorate the inside of 
the mould with slices of truffle), put it in a moderate oven, and when 
it is warm turn it  out  on a  dish. Place  the sweetbreads on the risotto 
and fill in the centre with quenelles of fowl and Espagnole sauce (No. 
1).  

No. 115. Animelle Lardellate (Sweetbread)  

Ingredients:  Sweetbreads,  larding,  bacon,  stock,  a  macedoine  of 
vegetables.  

Blanch  two  sweetbreads,  lard  them,  and  cook  them  very  slowly  in 
good  stock.  Skim  the  stock  and  reduce  it  to  a  glaze  to  cover  the 
sweetbreads.  Then  cut  them  into  three  or  four  pieces  and  arrange 
them round a dish, but see that the larding is well glazed over. In the 
centre of the dish place a piece of bread in the shape of a cup and fill 
this with a macedoine of vegetables.  

No.  116.  Frittura  di  Bottoni  e  di  Animelle  (Sweetbread  and 
Mushrooms)  

Ingredients:  Sweetbread,  fresh  button  mushrooms,  flour,  bread 
crumbs, salt, pepper, parsley, butter, lemons.  

Peel  some  button  mushrooms  and  cut  them  in  halves.  Boil  a 
sweetbread,  and  cut  it  into  pieces  about  the  same  size  as  the 
mushrooms, flour, egg, and bread crumb them, and fry in butter; then 
serve with a garnish of fried parsley. Hand cut lemons with this dish.  

 45 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 117. Cervello in Fili serbe (Calf's Brains)  

Ingredients: Calf's brains, stock, butter, parsley, lemon.  

Boil  half  a  calf's  brain  in  good  stock  for  ten  minutes  then  drain  and 
pour a little melted butter and the juice of half a lemon over the brain; 
add some chopped parsley fried for one minute in butter, and serve as 
hot as possible.  

No. 118. Cervello alla Milanese (Calf's Brains)  

Ingredients: Calf s brains, eggs, bread crumbs, butter.  

Scald a calf's brain and let it get cold. Wipe it on a cloth, and get it as 
dry as possible, then cut it into pieces about the size of a walnut, egg 
and bread crumb them, fry in butter, and strew a little salt over them.  

No. 119. Cervello alla Villeroy (Calf's Brains)  

Ingredients: Calf's brains, eggs, flour, mushrooms, Velute sauce.  

Scald a calf's brain, and when cold cut it up and mask each piece with 
a  thick  sauce  made  of  well-reduced  Velute  (No.  2),  mixed  with 
chopped  cooked  mushrooms;  flour  them  over  and  dip  them  into  the 
yolk of an egg, and fry as quickly as possible.  

No. 120. Frittura of Liver and Brains  

Ingredients:  Calf's  liver  and  brains  (or  lamb's  or  pig's  fry),  butter, 
ham, flour, puff pastry.  

Cut  up  half  a  pound  of  liver  in  small  slices,  flour  and  fry  them  in 
butter  or  dripping,  together  with  a  calf's  or  pig's  or  sheep's  brain, 
previously  scalded  and  also  cut  up.  Serve  with  bits  of  fried  ham  and 
little diamond-shaped pieces of puff pastry.  

 46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 121. Cervello in Frittata Montano (Calf's Brains)  

Ingredients:  Calf's  brains,  stock,  cream,  eggs,  spice,  Parmesan, 
butter.  

Boil a calf's  brain in good stock for ten minutes, let it get cold, cut it 
up into little balls, and mask each piece with a mixture made of half a 
gill  of  cream,  the  yolks  of  two  eggs,  a  little  spice,  a  tablespoonful  of 
grated Parmesan, and the whites  of two eggs well beaten up. Fry the 
balls in butter, and serve as hot as possible. You may mask and cook 
the calf's brain without cutting it up, if you prefer it so.  

No. 122. Marinata di Cervello alla Villeroy (Calf's Brains)  

Ingredients:  Calf's  brains,  stock,  Bechamel  sauce,  eggs,  butter, 
lemon, forcemeat of fowl, flour.  

Boil a calf's or sheep's brain in good stock, wipe it well, and cut it up. 
Reduce  a  pint  of  Bechamel  (No.  3),  and  add  to  it  the  yolks  of  three 
eggs, an ounce of butter, and the juice of a lemon. When it boils throw 
in the cut-up brain; let it cool, then take out the brain and form it into 
little balls about the size of a small walnut. Make a forcemeat of fowl, 
and  add  a  dessert-spoonful  of  flour  to  it,  and  spread  it  out  very  thin 
on  a  paste-board,  and  into  this  wrap  the  balls  of  brain,  each 
separately.  Dip  them  into  a  pasta  marinate  (No.  17),  and  fry  them  a 
golden brown.  

No. 123. Minuta alla Milanese (Lamb's Sweetbread)  

Ingredients: Lamb's sweetbread, butter, onions, stock, Chablis, salt, 
lemon, herbs, cocks' combs, fowls' livers.  

Cut  up  equal  quantities  of  lamb's  sweetbreads,  cocks'  combs,  fowls' 
livers in pieces about the size of a filbert, flour and fry them slightly in 
butter  and  a  small  bit  of  onion,  add  half  a  glass  of  Chablis,  a  cup  of 
good  stock,  and  a  bunch  of  herbs.  Reduce  the  sauce,  and  thicken  it 
with a tablespoonful of butter and flour fried together. Make a border 

 47 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

of Risotto all'Italiana (No. 190), and put the sweetbread, &c., together 
with the sauce in the centre.  

No. 124. Animelle al Sapor di Targone (Lamb's Fry)  

Ingredients:  Lamb's  fry,  ham,  garlic,  larding  bacon,  spice,  herbs, 
butter, flour, stock.  

The  lamb's  fry  should  be  nearly  all  sweetbread,  and  very  little  liver. 
Lard each piece with bacon and ham, and roll it in chopped herbs and 
a  pinch  of  pounded  spice.  Then  dip  it  in  flour  and  braize  in  good 
stock, to which add three ounces of butter, some bits of bacon, ham, a 
bay leaf, herbs, and a clove of garlic with two cuts. Cook until the fry 
is  well  glazed  over,  and  serve  with  Tarragon  sauce  (No.  8).  Do  not 
leave the garlic in longer than ten minutes.  

No. 125. Fritto Misto alla Villeroy  

Ingredients:  Cocks'  combs,  calf's  brains,  sweetbread,  stock,  truffles, 
mushrooms, Villeroy, eggs, bread crumbs.  

Cook  some  big  cocks'  combs,  bits  of  calf  s  brains,  and  sweetbread  in 
good  stock,  then  drain  them  and  marinate  them  slightly  in  lemon 
juice and herbs. Prepare a Villeroy (No. 18), and add to it cuttings of 
sweetbread,  brains,  truffles,  mushrooms,  &c.  When  it  is  cold,  mask 
the cocks' combs and other ingredients with it, egg and bread-crumb 
them, and fry them a golden brown.  

No. 126. Fritto Misto alla Piemontese  

Ingredients:  Sweetbread,  calf  s  brains,  ox  palate,  flour,  eggs, 
Chablis, salt, herbs butter.  

Make a thin paste with a tablespoonful of flour, the yolks of two eggs, 
two Spoonsful of Chablis, and a little salt. Mix this up well, and if it is 
too thick add a little water. Beat up the whites of the two eggs into a 
snow. In the meantime blanch a sweetbread, half a calf's brain, and a 

 48 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

few bits of  cooked ox palate;  boil them all up with  a  bunch  of herbs; 
cut them into pieces about the size of a walnut, and dip them into the 
paste  so  that  each  piece  is  well  covered,  then  dip  them  into  the 
beaten-up whites of egg, and fry them very quickly in butter. This fry 
is generally served with a garnish of French beans, which should not 
be cut up, but half boiled, then dried, floured over and fried together 
with the other ingredients. The ox palates should be boiled for at least 
six hours before you use them in this dish.  

No. 127. Minuta di Fegatini (Ragout of Fowls' Livers)  

Ingredients:  Fowls'  or  turkeys'  livers,  flour,  butter,  parsley,  onions, 
salt, pepper, stock, Chablis.  

Cut  the  livers  in  half,  flour  them,  and  fry  lightly  in  butter  with 
chopped parsley, very little chopped onion, salt and pepper, then add 
a  quarter  pint  of  boiling  stock  and  half  a  glass  of  Chablis,  and  cook 
until  the  sauce  is  somewhat  reduced.  You  can  also  cook  the  livers 
simply in good meat gravy, but in this case they should not be floured. 
Serve  with  a  border  of  macaroni  (No.  183),  or  Risotto  (No.  190),  or 
Polenta (No. 187).  

No. 128. Minuta alla Visconti (Chickens' Livers)  

Ingredients:  Fowls'  livers,  eggs,  cheese,  butter,  cream,  cayenne 
pepper.  

Braize two fowls' livers in butter, then pound them up, and mix with a 
little cream, a tablespoonful of grated cheese and a dust of cayenne.  

Spread this rather thickly over small squares of toast, and keep them 
hot  whilst  you  make  a  custard  with  half  an  ounce  of  butter,  an  egg 
well beaten up, and a tablespoonful of cheese. Stir it over the fire till 
thick and then spread it on the hot toast. Serve very hot. This makes a 
good savoury.  

 49 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 129. Croutons alla Principesca  

Ingredients:  Croutons,  tongue,  sweetbread,  truffles,  fowl  or  game, 
Velute sauce, stock, eggs, butter.  

Fry  a  bit  of  bread  in  butter  till  it  is  a  light  brown  colour,  then  cut  it 
into  heart-shaped  pieces.  Prepare  a  ragout  with  bits  of  tongue, 
sweetbread,  fowl  or  game,  truffles,  two  or  three  spoonsful  of  well-
reduced Velute sauce (No. 2), and two or three of reduced gravy. Put a 
spoonful  of  the  ragout  in  each  crouton,  and  over  it  a  layer  of  fowl 
forcemeat  half  an  inch  thick;  trim  the  edges  neatly,  glaze  them  with 
the yolk of eggs beaten up, and put them in a buttered fireproof dish 
in  the  oven  for  twenty  minutes.  Then  glaze  them  with  reduced  stock 
and serve hot.  

For a maigre dish use fish for the ragout and forcemeat.  

No. 130. Croutons alla Romana  

Ingredients:  Bread,  fowl  forcemeat,  tongue,  truffles,  herbs,  cream, 
stock, butter, flour, eggs.  

Cut a bit of crumb of bread into round or square shapes, and on each 
put  a  spoonful  of  fowl  or  rabbit  forcemeat,  a  little  chopped  tongue, 
and  a  slight  flavouring  of  chopped  herbs;  cover  with  a  slice  of  bread 
the  same  shape  as  the  underneath  piece,  put  them  in  a  buttered 
fireproof dish,  and  moisten  them well with cream,  butter, and  stock. 
Cook until all the liquor is absorbed, but turn them over so that both 
sides  may  be  well  cooked,  then  flour  and  dip  them  into  beaten-up 
eggs; fry them a good colour and serve very hot.  

For  a  maigre  dish  use  forcemeat  of  fish  or  lobster,  and  more  cream 
instead of stock.  

 50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

FOWL, DUCK, GAME, HARE, RABBIT  

No. 131. Soffiato di Cappone (Fowl Souffle)  

Ingredients:  Fowl,  Bechamel,  stock,  semolina  flour,  potatoes,  salt, 
eggs, butter, smoked tongue or ham.  

Prepare  a  puree  of  fowl  or  turkey  and  a  small  quantity  of  grated 
tongue or ham, and whilst you are pounding the meat add some good 
gravy  or  stock.  Then  make  a  Bechamel  sauce  (No.  3)  and  add  two 
table-spoonsful  of  semolina  flour,  a  boiled  potato  and  salt  to  taste, 
boil  it  up  and  add  the  puree  of  fowl,  then  let  it  get  nearly  cold,  add 
yolks of eggs and the white beaten up into a snow. (For one pint of the 
puree  use  the  yolks  of  three  eggs.)  Pour  the  whole  into  a  buttered 
souffle case, and half an hour before serving put it in a moderate oven 
and  serve  hot.  You  can  use  game  instead  of  fowl,  and  serve  in  little 
souffle cases.  

No. 132. Pollo alla Fiorentina (Chicken)  

Ingredients:  Fowl,  butter,  vegetables, 
rice  or  macaroni, 
peppercorns,  stock,  ham,  tomatoes,  bay  leaves,  onions,  cloves, 
Liebig.  

Roll up a fowl in buttered paper and put it in the oven in  a fireproof 
dish with all kinds of vegetables and a few peppercorns. Leave it there 
for about two hours, then put the fowl and vegetables into two quarts 
of good stock and let it simmer for one hour; serve on well-boiled rice 
or macaroni and pour the following sauce over it. Sauce: Two pounds 
tomatoes,  one  big  cup  of  good  stock,  a  quarter  pound  of  chopped 
ham, three bay leaves, one onion stuck with cloves, one teaspoonful of 
Liebig. Simmer an hour and a half.  

 51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 133. Pollo all'Oliva (Chicken)  

Ingredients:  Fowl,  onions,  celery,  salt,  parsley,  carrots,  butter, 
stock, olives, tomatoes.  

Cut up half an onion, a stick of celery, a sprig of parsley, a carrot, and 
cook them all in a quarter pound of butter. Into this put a fowl cut up 
and  let  it  act  brown  all  over,  turn  when  necessary  and  then  baste  it 
with  boiling  stock.  Add  four  Spanish  olives  cut  up  and  four  others 
pounded  in  a  mortar,  eight  whole  olives  and  three  tablespoonsful  of 
tomato  puree  reduced,  and  when  the  fowl  is  well  cooked  pour  the 
sauce over it.  

No. 134. Pollo alla Villereccia (Chicken)  

Ingredients:  Fowl,  butter,  flour,  stock,  bacon,  ham,  mushrooms, 
onions, cloves, eggs, cream, lemons.  

Cut  up  a  fowl  into  quarters  and  put  it  into  a  saucepan  with  three 
ounces  of  butter  and  a  tablespoonful  of  flour  Put  it  on  the  fire,  and 
when  it  is  well  browned  add  half  a  pint  of  stock,  bits  of  bacon  and 
ham,  butter,  three  mushrooms  (previously  boiled),  an  onion  stuck 
with  three  cloves.  When  this  is  cooked  skim  off  the  grease,  pass  the 
sauce through a sieve, and  add the yolks of two eggs mixed with two 
tablespoonsful  of  cream.  Lastly,  add  a  squeeze  of  lemon  juice  to  the 
sauce and pour it over the fowl.  

No. 135. Pollo alla Cacciatora (Chicken)  

Ingredients: The same as No. 134 and tomatoes.  

Cook the fowl exactly as above, but add either a puree of tomatoes or 
tomato sauce.  

No. 136. Pollastro alla Lorenese (Fowl)  

Ingredients:  Fowl,  butter,  parsley,  lemon,  small  onions,  bread 
crumbs.  

 52 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Cut  up  a fowl and  put  it into a frying pan with two  ounces of  butter, 
one onion cut up and a sprig of chopped parsley, salt and pepper; put 
it on the fire and cook it, but turn the pieces several times: then take 
them  out  and  roll  them  whilst  hot  in  bread  crumbs,  and  fry  them. 
Serve with cut lemons.  

No. 137. Pollastro in Fricassea al Burro (Fowl)  

Ingredients:  Fowl,  butter,  fat  bacon,  ham,  mushrooms,  truffles, 
herbs, spice, gravy.  

Cut up a fowl and cook it in a fricassee of butter, bacon, ham, herbs, 
mushrooms, truffles, spice, and good gravy or stock. Serve in its own 
gravy.  

No. 138. Pollastro in istufa di Pomidoro (Braized Fowl)  

Ingredients:  Fowl,  bacon,  ham,  bay  leaf,  spice,  garlic,  Burgundy, 
tomatoes.  

Braize a fowl with bits of fat bacon, ham, a bay leaf, a clove of garlic 
with  one  cut  in  it,  a  pinch  of  spice,  and  a  glass  of  Burgundy.  Only 
leave  the  garlic  in  for  five  minutes.  When  cooked  serve  with  tomato 
sauce (No. 9).  

No. 139. Cappone con Riso (Capon with Rice)  

Ingredients:  Capon,  veal  forcemeat,  fat  bacon,  stock,  rice,  truffles, 
mushrooms,  cocks'  combs,  kidneys  or  fowls'  liver,  supreme  sauce, 
milk, Chablis.  

Stuff  a  fine  capon  with  a  good  firm  forcemeat  made  of  veal,  tongue, 
ham,  and  chopped  truffles;  cover  it  with  larding  bacon;  tie  it  up  in 
buttered paper, and cook it in very good white stock. In the meantime 
boil  four  ounces  of  rice  in  milk  till  quite  stiff,  mix  in  some  chopped 
truffles, and make ten little timbales of it. Take out the capon when it 
is  sufficiently  cooked  and  place  it  on  a  dish;  garnish  it  with  cooked 

 53 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

mushrooms, cocks' combs, kidneys, or fowls' livers, and pour a sauce 
supreme  (No.  16)  over  it;  round  the  dish  place  the  timbales  of  rice, 
and  between  each  put  a  whole  truffle  cooked  in  white  wine.  Serve  a 
sauce supreme in a sauce bowl.  

No. 140. Dindo Arrosto alla Milanese (Roast Turkey)  

Ingredients:  Turkey,  sausage  meat,  prunes,  chestnuts,  a  pear, 
butter, Marsala, salt, rosemary, bacon, carrot, onion, turnip, garlic.  

Blanch for seven or eight minutes three prunes, quarter of a pound of 
sausage meat, three tablespoonsful of chestnut puree, two small slices 
of  bacon,  half  a  cooked  pear,  and  saute  them  in  butter;  chop  up  the 
liver  and  gizzard  of  the  turkey,  mix  them  with  the  other  ingredients, 
and add half  a glass of Marsala;  use this as a stuffing for the turkey, 
and  first  braize  it  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour  with  salt,  butter,  a 
blade of rosemary, bits of fat bacon, a carrot, a turnip, an onion, three 
cloves, and a clove of garlic with a cut; then roast it before a clear fire 
for about twenty minutes; put it back into the sauce till it is ready to 
serve. Only leave the garlic in ten minutes.  

No. 141. Tacchinotto all'Istrione (Turkey Poult)  

Ingredients:  A  turkey  poult,  ham,  mace,  bay  leaves,  lemons,  water, 
salt, onions, parsley, celery, carrots, Chablis.  

Truss a turkey poult, and cover it all over with slices of ham or bacon, 
put two bay leaves and four slices of lemon on it, and sprinkle with a 
small pinch of mace, then sew it up tight in a dishcloth, and stew it in 
good  stock,  salt,  an  onion,  parsley,  a  stick  of  celery,  a  carrot,  and  a 
pint of Chablis;  cook for an hour, take  it out of the cloth, and pour a 
good rich sauce over it. It is also good cold with aspic jelly.  

 54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 142. Fagiano alla Napoletana (Pheasant)  

Ingredients:  Pheasant,  macaroni,  gravy,  butter,  Parmesan, 
tomatoes.  

Lard  a pheasant, roast it, and serve it  on a layer of  macaroni  cooked 
with  good  reduced  gravy,  two  ounces  of  butter,  a  tablespoonful  of 
grated  Parmesan,  and  a  puree  of  tomatoes.  Serve  with  Neapolitan 
sauce (No. 12) in a sauce bowl.  

No. 143. Fagiano alla Perigo (Pheasant)  

Ingredients: Pheasant, butter, truffles, larding bacon, Madeira.  

Make  a  mixture  of  three  tablespoonsful  of  chopped  truffles,  three 
ounces of butter and a little salt, and with this stuff a pheasant. Then 
cover it with slices of fat bacon and keep it in a cool place till next day. 
A few hours before serving, roast the pheasant and baste it well with 
melted  butter  and  a  wine-glass  of  Madeira  or  Marsala.  Make  a 
crouton  of  fried  bread  the  shape  of  your  dish,  and  over  this  put  a 
Layer  of  forcemeat  of  fowl  and  a  number  of  small  fowl  quenelles; 
cover  them  with  buttered  paper,  then  put  the  dish  in  the  oven  for  a 
few  minutes  so  as  to  settle  the  forcemeat.  When  the  pheasant  is 
cooked,  place  it  on  the  crouton  and  garnish  it  with  slices  of  truffle 
which  have  been  previously  cooked  in  Madeira,  and  serve  with  a 
Perigord sauce.  

No. 144. Anitra Selvatica (Wild Duck)  

Ingredients:  Wild  duck,  butter,  fowls'  livers,  Marsala,  gravy, 
turnips, carrots, parsley, mushrooms.  

Cut a wild duck into quarters and put it into a stewpan with two fowls' 
livers cut up and fried in butter. When the pieces of duck are coloured 
on  both  sides,  pour  off  the  butter,  and  in  its  place  pour  a  glass  of 
Marsala,  a  cup  of  stock,  and  a  cup  of  Espagnole  sauce  (No.1),  and 
cook  gently  for  ten  minutes.  In  the  meantime  shape  and  blanch  six 
young  turnips  and  as  many  young  carrots,  put  them  into  a  stewpan, 

 55 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

and on the top of them put the pieces of wild duck, liver, &c. Pass the 
liquor through a sieve and pour it over the wild duck, add a bunch of 
parsley and other herbs and five little mushrooms cut up, and cook on 
a  slow  fire  for  half  an  hour.  Skim  the  sauce,  pass  it  through  a  sieve 
and  add  a  pinch  of  sugar.  Put  the  pieces  of  wild  duck  in  an  entree 
dish, add the vegetables, &c., pour the sauce over and serve.  

No. 145. Perniciotti alla Gastalda (Partridges)  

Ingredients:  Partridges,  cauliflower,  bacon,  sausage,  fowls'  livers, 
carrots, onions herbs, stock, gravy, butter, Madeira.  

Cut  a  cauliflower  into  quarters,  blanch  for  a  few  minutes,  drain,  and 
put it into  a saucepan with some bits  of bacon. Let it  drain  on paper 
till dry, then arrange the bits in a circle in a deep stewpan, and in the 
centre put a small bit of sausage, the livers of the partridges, a fowl's 
liver  cut  up,  a  carrot,  an  onion,  and  a  bunch  of  herbs.  Cover  about 
three-quarters high with good stock  and gravy, put butter on the top 
and  boil  gently  for  an  hour;  then  take  out  the  sausage,  replace  it  by 
two or three partridges, and simmer for three-quarters of an hour. In 
the  meantime  cut  a  sausage  in  thin  slices  and  line  a  mould  with  it. 
When  the  birds  are  cooked,  take  them  out,  drain  and  cut  them  up, 
and  fill  the  mould  with  alternate  layers  of  partridge  and  cauliflower, 
and  steam  for  half  an  hour.  Five  minutes  before  serving  turn  the 
mould over on a plate, but do not take it off, so as to let all the grease 
drain  off.  Cut  up  the  fowls'  and  partridges'  livers,  make  them  into 
scallops and glaze them. Wipe off all the grease round the mould; take 
it off, garnish the dish with the scallops of liver and serve hot with an 
Espagnole  sauce  (No.  1)  reduced,  and  add  a  glass  of  Madeira  or 
Marsala, and a glass of essence of game to it. This is an excellent way 
of cooking an old partridge or pheasant.  

No. 146. Beccaccini alla Diplomatica (Snipe)  

Ingredients:  Snipe,  ham,  larding  bacon,  herbs,  Marsala,  croutons, 
truffles, cocks' combs, mushrooms, sweetbread, tongue.  

 56 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Truss  fourteen  snipe  and  cook  them  in  a  mirepoix  made  with  plenty 
of ham, fat bacon, herbs, and a wine glass of Marsala. When they are 
cooked pour off the sauce, skim off the grease and reduce it. Take the 
two smallest snipe and make a forcemeat of them by pounding them 
in  a  mortar  with  the  livers  of  all  the  snipe,  then  dilute  this  with 
reduced  Espagnole  sauce  (No.  1)  and  add  it  to  the  first  sauce.  Cut 
twelve croutons  of bread just large enough to hold a  snipe each, and 
fry  them  in  butter.  Add  some  chopped  herbs  and  truffles  to  the 
forcemeat,  spread  it  on  the  croutons,  and  on  each  place  a  snipe  and 
cover  it  with  a  bit  of  fat  bacon  and  buttered  paper.  Put  them  in  a 
moderate  oven  for  a  few  minutes,  arrange  them  on  a  dish,  and  pour 
some  of  their  own  sauce  over  them.  Garnish  the  spaces  between  the 
croutons  with  white  cocks'  combs,  mushrooms,  and  truffles.  The 
truffles  should  be  scooped  out  and  filled  with  a  little  stuffing  of 
sweetbread, tongue, and truffles mixed with a little of the sauce of the 
snipe. Serve the rest of the sauce in a sauce-boat.  

No. 147. Piccioni alla minute (Pigeons)  

Ingredients:  Pigeons,  butter, 
sweetbread, salt, flour, stock, Burgundy.  

truffles,  herbs, 

fowls' 

livers, 

Prepare two pigeons and put them into a stewpan with two ounces of 
butter, two truffles cut up, two fowls' livers, half-pound of sweetbread 
cuttings  (boiled),  a  bunch  of  herbs  and  salt.  Let  them  brown  a  little, 
then add a dessert-spoonful of flour mixed with stock, and half a glass 
of Burgundy, and stew gently for half an hour.  

No. 148. Piccioni in Ripieno (Stuffed Pigeons)  

Ingredients:  Pigeons,  sweetbread,  parsley,  onions,  carrots,  salt, 
pepper, bacon, stock, Chablis, fowls' livers, and gizzards.  

Cut  up  a  sweetbread,  a  fowl's  liver  and  gizzard,  an  onion,  a  sprig  of 
parsley,  and  add  salt  and  pepper.  Put  this  stuffing  into  two  pigeons, 
tie larding bacon over them, and put them into a stewpan with a glass 
of Chablis, a cup of stock, an  onion, and a carrot. When cooked pass 

 57 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

the sauce through a sieve, skim it, add a little more sauce, and pour it 
over the pigeons.  

No. 149. Lepre in istufato (Stewed Hare)  

Ingredients:  Hare,  butter,  onions,  garlic,  marjoram,  celery,  ham, 
salt, Chablis, stock, mushrooms, spice, tomatoes.  

Put into a stewpan three ounces of butter, an onion cut up, a clove of 
garlic  with  a  cut  across  it,  a  sprig  of  marjoram,  and  a  little  cut-up 
ham.  Fry  these  slightly,  put  the  hare  cut  up  into  the  same  stewpan, 
and let it get brown. Then pour a glass of Chablis and a glass of stock 
over  it;  add  a  little  tomato  sauce  or  a  mashed-up  tomato,  a  pinch  of 
spice, and a few mushrooms; take out the garlic and let the rest stew 
gently  for  an  hour  or  more.  Keep  the  cover  on  the  stewpan,  but  stir 
the stew occasionally.  

No. 150. Lepre Agro-dolce (Hare)  

Ingredients:  Hare,  vinegar  butter,  onion,  ham,  stock  salt,  sugar, 
chocolate, almonds, raisins.  

Cut  up  a  hare  and  wash  the  pieces  in  vinegar,  then  cook  them  in 
butter,  chopped  onion,  some  bits  of  ham  stock  and  a  little  salt.  Half 
fill  a  wine-glass  with  sugar  and  add  vinegar  until  the  glass  is  three-
quarters  full  mix  the  vinegar  and  sugar  well  together,  and  when  the 
hare  is  browned  all  over  and  nearly  cooked,  pour  the  vinegar  over  it 
and  add  a  dessert  spoonful  of  grated  chocolate  a  few  shredded 
almonds and stoned raisins. Mix all well together and cook for a few 
minutes more. This is a favourite Roman dish.  

No. 151. Coniglio alla Provenzale (Rabbit)  

Ingredients:  Rabbit,  flour  butter,  stock,  Chablis,  parsley  onion, 
spice, mushrooms.  

 58 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Cut  up  a  rabbit,  wipe  the  pieces,  flour  them  over,  and  fry  them  in 
butter  until  they  are  coloured  all  over.  Then  pour  a  glass  of  Chablis 
over  them,  add  some  chopped  parsley,  half  an  onion,  three 
mushrooms,  salt,  and  a  cup  of  good  stock.  Cover  the  stewpan  and 
cook  on  a  moderate  fire  for  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  Should 
the stew act too dry, add a spoonful of stock occasionally.  

No. 152. Coniglio arrostito alla Corradino (Roast Rabbit)  

Ingredients:  Rabbit,  pig's  fry,  butter,  salt,  pepper,  fennel,  bay  leaf, 
onions.  

Make a stuffing of pig's fry (previously cooked in butter), salt, pepper, 
fennel,  an  onion,  all  chopped  up,  and  a  bay  leaf.  With  this  stuff  a 
rabbit well and braize it for half an hour, then roast it  before a  brisk 
fire  and  baste  it  well  with  good  gravy.  If  you  like,  put  in  a  clove  of 
garlic  with  one  cut  whilst  it  is  being  braized,  but  only  leave  it  in  for 
five minutes. Serve with ham sauce (Salsa di prosciutto, No. 7.) A fowl 
may be cooked in this way.  

No. 153. Coniglio in salsa Piccante (Rabbit)  

Ingredients:  Rabbit,  butter,  flour,  celery,  parsley,  onion,  carrot, 
mushrooms, cloves, spices, Burgundy, stock, capers, anchovies.  

Cut  up  a  rabbit,  wipe  the  pieces  well  on  a  dishcloth,  flour  them  over 
and put them into a frying-pan with two ounces of butter and fry for 
about ten minutes. Then add half a stick of celery, parsley, an onion, 
half a carrot, and three mushrooms, all cut up, three cloves, a pinch of 
spice  and  salt,  a  glass  of  Burgundy,  and  the  same  quantity  of  stock; 
cover  the  stewpan  and  cook  for  half  an  hour,  then  put  the  pieces  of 
rabbit into another stewpan and pass the liquor through a sieve; press 
it well with a wooden spoon, so as to get as much through as possible, 
pour this over the rabbit and add four capers and an anchovy in brine 
pounded  in  a  mortar,  mix  all  well  together,  let  it  simmer  for  a  few 
minutes, then serve hot with a garnish of croutons fried in butter.  

 59 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

VEGETABLES  

No. 154. Asparagi alla salsa Suprema (Asparagus)  

Ingredients:  Asparagus,  butter,  nutmeg,  salt,  supreme  sauce  (No. 
16) gravy, lemon, Parmesan.  

Cut some asparagus into pieces about an inch long and cook them in 
boiling water with salt, then drain and put them into a sauté pan with 
one and a half ounce of melted butter and sauté for a few minutes, but 
first add salt, a pinch of nutmeg, and a dust of grated cheese. Pour a 
little supreme sauce over them, and at the last add a little gravy, one 
ounce of fresh butter, and a squeeze of lemon juice.  

No.  155.  Cavoli  di  Bruxelles  alla  Savoiarda  (Brussels 
Sprouts)  

Ingredients: Brussels sprouts, butter, pepper, stock, Bechamel sauce, 
Parmesan, croutons.  

Take off the  outside leaves of half a pound  of Brussels sprouts, wash 
and boil them in salted water. Let them get cool, drain, and put them 
in  a  pie-dish  with  two  ounces  of  fresh  butter,  a  quarter  pint  of  very 
good stock, a little pepper, and a dust of grated Parmesan. When they 
are  well  glazed  over,  pour  off  the  sauce,  season  with  three 
tablespoonsful  of  boiling  Bechamel  sauce  (No.  3),  and  serve  with 
croutons fried in butter.  

No. 156. Barbabietola alla Parmigiana (Beetroot)  

Ingredients: Beetroot, white sauce, Parmesan, Cheddar.  

Boil a beetroot till it is quite tender, peel it, cut into slices, put it in a 
fireproof  dish,  and  cover  it  with  a  thick  white  sauce.  Strew  a  little 
grated  Parmesan  and  Cheddar  over  it.  Put  it  in  the  oven  for  a  few 
minutes, and serve very hot in the dish.  

 60 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 157. Fave alla Savoiarda (Beans)  

Ingredients: Beans, stock, a bunch of herbs, Bechamel sauce.  

Boil one pound of broad beans in salt and water, skin and cook them 
in  a  saucepan  with  a  quarter  pint  of  reduced  stock  and  a  hunch  of 
herbs. Drain them, take out the herbs, and season with two glasses of 
Bechamel sauce (No. 3).  

No. 158. Verze alla Capuccina (Cabbage)  

Ingredients:  Cabbage  or  greens,  anchovies,  salt,  butter,  parsley, 
gravy, Parmesan.  

Boil two cabbages in a good deal of water, and cut them into quarters. 
Fry  two  anchovies  slightly  in  butter  and  chopped  parsley,  add  the 
cabbages,  and  at  the  last  three  tablespoonsful  of  good  gravy,  two 
tablespoonsful  of  grated  Parmesan,  salt  and  pepper,  and  when 
cooked, serve.  

No. 159. Cavoli fiodi alla Lionese (Cauliflower)  

Ingredients:  Cauliflower,  butter,  onions,  parsley,  lemon,  Espagnole 
sauce.  

Blanch  a  cauliflower  and  boil  it,  but  not  too  much.  Cut  up  a  small 
onion, fry it slightly in butter and chopped parsley, and when it is well 
coloured,  add  the  cauliflower  and  finish  cooking  it,  then  take  it  out, 
put it in a dish, pour a good Espagnole sauce (No. 1) over it, and add a 
squeeze of lemon juice.  

No. 160. Cavoli fiodi fritti (Cauliflower)  

Ingredients:  Cauliflower  or  broccoli,  gravy,  lemon,  salt,  eggs, 
butter.  

Break  up  a  broccoli  or  cauliflower  into  little  bunches,  blanch  them, 
and  put  them  on  the  fire  in  a  saucepan  with  good  gravy  for  a  few 

 61 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

minutes, then marinate them with lemon juice and salt, let them get 
cold, egg them over, and fry in butter.  

No. 161. Cauliflower alla Parmigiana  

Ingredients:  Cauliflower,  butter,  Parmesan,  Cheddar,  Espagnole, 
stock.  

Boil  a  cauliflower  in  salted  water,  then  sauté  it  in  butter,  but  be 
careful  not  to  cook  it  too  much.  Take  it  off  the  fire  and  strew  grated 
Parmesan and Cheddar over it then put in a fireproof dish and add a 
good spoonful of stock and one of Espagnole (No. 1), and put it in the 
oven for ten minutes.  

No. 162. Cavoli Fiori Ripieni  

Ingredients:  Cauliflower,  butter,  stock,  forcemeat  of  fowl,  tongue, 
truffles, mushrooms, parsley, Espagnole, eggs.  

Break up a cauliflower into separate little bunches, blanch them, and 
put  them  in  butter,  and  a  quarter  pint  of  reduced  stock.  Make  a 
forcemeat  of  fowl,  add  bits  of  tongue,  truffles,  mushrooms,  and 
parsley,  all  cut  up  small  and  mixed  with  butter.  With  this  mask  the 
pieces  of  cauliflower,  egg  and  breadcrumb  them,  fry  like  croquettes, 
and serve with a good Espagnole sauce (No. 1).  

No. 163. Sedani alla Parmigiana (Celery)  

Ingredients:  Celery,  stock,  ham,  salt,  pepper,  Cheddar,  Parmesan, 
butter, gravy.  

Cut all the green off a head of celery, trim the rest. Cut it into pieces 
about  four  inches  long,  blanch  and  braize  them  in  good  stock,  ham, 
salt,  and  pepper.  When  cooked,  drain  and  arrange  them  on  a  dish, 
sprinkle with grated Parmesan  and Cheddar, and  add one and a half 
ounce of butter, then put them in the oven till they have taken a good 
colour, pour a little good gravy over them and serve.  

 62 

 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 164. Sedani fritti all'Italiana (Celery)  

Ingredients: Same as No. 163, eggs, bread crumbs, tomatoes.  

Prepare  a  head  of  celery  as  above,  and  cut  it  up  into  equal  pieces. 
Blanch and braize as above, and when  cold egg and breadcrumb and 
sauté in butter. Serve with tomato sauce.  

No. 165. Cetriuoli alla Parmigiana (Cucumber)  

Ingredients: Cucumber, butter, cheese, gravy, salt, cayenne.  

Cut  a  cucumber  into  slices  about  half  an  inch  thick,  boil  for  five 
minutes  in  salted  water,  drain  in  a  sieve,  and  fry  slightly  in  melted 
butter,  then  strew  a  little  grated  Parmesan  over  it,  and  add  a  good 
thick gravy, put it into the oven for ten minutes to  brown, and serve 
as hot as possible.  

No. 166. Cetriuoli alla Borghese (Cucumber)  

Ingredients:  Cucumber,  cream,  salt,  Bechamel  sauce,  butter, 
Parmesan, cayenne pepper.  

Cook a cucumber as in No. 165, braize it for five minutes, add to it a 
good rich Bechamel (No. 3), mixed with cream and grated Parmesan 
Spread  this  well  over  the  cucumber,  and  put  it  into  the  oven  for  ten 
minutes  keeping  the  rounds  of  cucumber  separate,  so  as  to  arrange 
them in a circle on a very hot dish. Care should be taken not to cook 
the cucumber too long, or it will break in pieces and spoil the look of 
the dish.  

No. 167. Carote al sughillo (Carrots)  

Ingredients: Carrots, stock, butter, sausage, pepper.  

Boil  some  young  carrots  in  stock,  slice  them  up,  and  put  them  in  a 
stewpan with a sausage cut up; cook for quarter of an hour on a slow 

 63 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

fire, then stir up the fire, and when the carrots and sausage are a good 
colour add a good Espagnole sauce (No. 1), and serve.  

No. 168. Carote e piselli alla panna (Carrots and Peas)  

Ingredients: Young carrots, peas, cream, salt.  

Half  cook  equal  quantities  of  peas  and  young  carrots  (the  carrots 
should  be  cut  in  dice,  and  will  require  a  little  longer  cooking),  then 
put  them  together  in  a  stewpan  with  three  or  four  tablespoonsful  of 
cream, and cook till quite tender. Serve hot.  

No. 169. Verze alla Certosine (Cabbage)  

Ingredients: Cabbage, butter, salt, leeks or shallots, sardines, cheese.  

Any  vegetable  may  be  cooked  in  the  following  simple  manner:  Boil 
them well, then slightly fry a little bit of leek or shallot and a sardine 
in  butter;  drain  the  vegetables,  put  them  in  the  butter,  and  cook 
gently  so  that  they  may  absorb  all  the  flavour,  and  at  the  last  add  a 
dust of grated cheese and a tiny pinch of spice.  

No. 170. Lattughe al sugo (Lettuce)  

Ingredients:  Lettuce,  Parmesan,  bacon,  stock,  butter,  croutons  of 
bread, gravy.  

Take  off  the  outside  leaves  of  a  lettuce,  blanch  and  drain  them  well. 
Put  on  each  leaf  a  mixture  of  grated  Parmesan,  salt,  little  bits  of 
chopped  bacon  or  ham,  add  a  little  good  stock,  cover  over  with 
buttered  paper,  and  cook  in  a  hot  oven  for  five  minutes.  Then  drain 
off  the  stock  and  roll  up  each  leaf  with  the  bacon,  &c.,  put  them  on 
croutons of fried bread and pour some good thick gravy over them.  

 64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 171 Lattughe farcite alla Genovese (Lettuce)  

Ingredients:  Lettuce,  forcemeat  of  fowl  or  veal,  ham,  Espagnole 
sauce.  

Prepare  a  lettuce  as  above,  and  spread  on  each  leaf  a  spoonful  of 
forcemeat of fowl or veal, add a little cooked ham chopped up, roll up 
the  leaves,  and  cook  as  above.  Drain  them  on  a  cloth,  arrange  them 
neatly  on  a  dish,  and  pour  some  good  Espagnole  sauce  (No.  1)  over 
them.  

No. 172. Funghi cappelle infarcite (Stuffed Mushrooms)  

Ingredients:  Mushrooms,  bread,  stock,  garlic,  parsley,  salt, 
Parmesan, butter, eggs, cream.  

Choose a dozen good fresh mushrooms, take off the stalks and put the 
tops  into  a  saucepan  with  a  little  butter.  See  that  they  lie  bottom 
upwards.  Then  cut  up  and  mix  together  half  the  stalks  of  the 
mushrooms, a little bread crumb soaked in gravy, the merest scrap of 
garlic  and  a  little  chopped  parsley.  Put  this  into  a  separate  saucepan 
and  add  to  it  two  eggs,  half  a  gill  of  cream,  salt,  and  two 
tablespoonsful  of  grated  Parmesan.  Mix  well  so  as  to  get  a  smooth 
paste  and  fill  in  the  cavities  of  the  mushrooms  with  it.  Then  add  a 
little  more  butter,  strew  some  bread  crumbs  over  each  mushroom, 
and cook in the oven for ten to fifteen minutes.  

No. 173. Verdure miste (Macedoine of Vegetables)  

Ingredients:  Cauliflower,  carrots,  celery,  spinach,  butter,  cream, 
pepper, Parmesan.  

Boil  some  carrots,  cauliflower,  spinach,  and  celery  (all  cut  up)  in 
water.  Then  put  them  in  layers  in  a  buttered  china  mould,  and 
between  each  layer  add  a  little  cream,  pepper,  and  a  little  grated 
Parmesan  and  Cheddar.  Fill  the  mould  in  this  manner,  and  put  it  in 
the  oven  for  half  an  hour,  so  that  the  vegetables  may  cook  without 
adhering to the mould. Turn out and serve.  

 65 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 174. Patate alla crema (Potatoes in cream)  

Ingredients: Potatoes, butter, Parmesan, white stock, cream, pepper, 
salt.  

Boil two pounds of potatoes in salted water for a quarter of an hour, 
peel and cut them into slices about the size of a penny, then arrange 
them in layers in a very deep fireproof dish (with a lid), and on each 
layer pour a little melted butter, a little good white stock and a dust of 
grated  Parmesan.  Reduce  a  pint  and  a  half  of  cream  to  half  its 
quantity,  add  a  little  pepper,  and  pour  it  over  the  potatoes.  Put  the 
dish in the oven for twenty minutes. Serve as hot as possible.  

No. 175. Cestelline di patate alla giardiniera (Potatoes)  

Ingredients:  Potatoes,  white  stock,  salt,  butter,  peas,  asparagus, 
sprouts, beans, &c.  

Choose  some  big  sound  potatoes,  cut  them  in  half  and  scoop  out  a 
little of the centre so as to form a cavity, blanch them in salted water 
and  cook  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  good  white  stock  and  a  little 
butter. Then fill in the cavities with a macedoine of cooked vegetables 
and add a little cream to each.  

No. 176. Patate al Pomidoro (Potatoes with Tomato Sauce)  

Ingredients: Potatoes, butter, salt, tomatoes, lemon, stock.  

Peel three or four raw potatoes, cut them in slices about the size of a 
five-shilling  piece,  then  put  them  into  a  stewpan  with  two  ounces  of 
melted butter, and cook them gently until they are a good colour, add 
salt,  drain  off  the  butter,  then  glaze  them  by  adding  half  a  glass  of 
good  stock.  Arrange  them  on  a  dish,  pour  some  good  tomato  sauce 
over them, and add a little butter and a squeeze of lemon juice.  

 66 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 177. Spinaci alla Milanese (Spinach)  

Ingredients: Spinach, butter, Velute sauce, salt, pepper, flour, stock.  

Wash  three  pounds  of  spinach  at  least  six  times,  boil  it  in  a  pint  of 
water, then mince it up very fine, pass it through a hair-sieve, and put 
it in a saucepan with one and a half ounces of butter, add a cupful of 
reduced  Velute  sauce  (No.  2)  with  cream,  salt,  and  pepper,  add  a 
dessert-spoonful of flour and butter mixed, and boil until the spinach 
is firm enough to make into a shape, garnish with hardboiled eggs cut 
into  quarters,  and  pour  a  good  Espagnole  sauce  (No.  1)  round  the 
dish.  

No. 178. Insalata di patate (Potato salad)  

Ingredients:  New  potatoes,  oil,  white  vinegar,  onions,  parsley, 
tarragon,  chervil,  celery,  cream,  salt,  pepper,  tarragon  vinegar, 
watercress, cucumber, truffles.  

Steam  as  many  new  potatoes  as  you  require  until  they  are  well 
cooked,  let  them  get  cold,  cut  them  into  slices  and  pour  three 
teaspoonsful  of  salad  oil  and  one  of  white  vinegar  over  them.  Then 
rub  a  salad  bowl  with  onion,  put  in  a  layer  of  the  potato  slices,  and 
sprinkle  with  chopped  parsley,  tarragon,  chervil,  and  celery,  then 
another  layer  of  potatoes  until  you  have  used  all  the  potatoes;  cover 
them  with  whipped  cream  seasoned  with  salt,  pepper,  and  a  little 
tarragon  vinegar,  and  garnish  the  top  with  watercress,  a  few  thin 
slices  of  truffle  cooked  in  white  wine,  and  some  slices  of  cooked 
cucumber.  

No. 179. Insalata alla Navarino (Salad)  

Ingredients:  Peas,  bean  onions,  potatoes,  tarragon,  chives,  parsley, 
tomatoes, anchovies, oil, vinegar, ham.  

Mix  a  tablespoonful  of  chopped  parsley,  a  teaspoonful  of  chopped 
onion, a teaspoonful of tarragon and chopped chives with half a gill of 
oil and half a gill of vinegar. Put this into a salad bowl with all sorts of 

 67 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

cooked vegetables: peas, haricot beans, small onions, and potatoes cut 
up, and mix them w ell but gently, so as not to  break  the vegetables. 
Then add two or three anchovies in oil, and on the top place three or 
four  ripe  tomatoes  cut  in  slices.  A  little  cooked  smoked  ham  cut  in 
dice added to this salad is a great improvement.  

No. 180. Insalata di pomidoro (Tomato Salad)  

Ingredients:  Tomatoes,  mayonnaise,  shallot,  horseradish,  gherkin, 
anchovies, fish, cucumber, lettuce, chervil, tarragon, eggs.  

Mix  the  following  ingredients:  two  anchovies  in  oil  boned  and 
minced,  a  gill  of  mayonnaise  sauce,  a  little  grated  horseradish,  very 
little  chopped  shallot,  a  little  cold  salmon  or  trout,  and  a  small 
gherkin  chopped.  With  this  mixture  stuff  some  ripe  tomatoes.  Then 
make  a  good  salad  of  endive  or  lettuce,  a  teaspoonful  of  chopped 
tarragon and chervil, season it with oil, vinegar, salt, and pepper (the 
proportions  should  be  three  of  oil  to  one  of  vinegar),  put  a  layer  of 
slices of cucumber in the salad, place the tomatoes on the top of these, 
and decorate them with hard-boiled eggs passed through a wire sieve.  

No. 181. Tartufi alla Dino (Truffles)  

Ingredients: Truffles, fowl forcemeat, champagne.  

Allow one truffle for each person, scoop out the inside, chop it up fine 
and  mix  with  a  good  forcemeat  of  fowl.  With  this  fill  up  the  truffles, 
place  a  thin  layer  of  truffle  on  the  top  of  each,  and  cook  them  in 
champagne in a stewpan for about half an hour. Then take them out, 
make  a  rich  sauce,  to  which  add  the  champagne  you  have  used  and 
some of the chopped truffle, put the truffles in this sauce and keep hot 
for ten minutes. Serve in paper souffle cases.  

 68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

MACARONI, RICE, POLENTA, AND OTHER 
ITALIAN PASTES  

No. 182. Macaroni with Tomatoes  

Ingredients: Macaroni, tomatoes, butter, onion, basil, pepper, salt.  

Fry half an onion slightly in butter, and as soon as it is coloured add a 
puree  of  two  big  cooked  tomatoes.  Then  boil  quarter  of  a  pound  of 
macaroni separately, drain it and  put  it in a  deep fireproof dish, add 
the  tomato  puree  and  three  tablespoonsful  of  grated  Parmesan  and 
Cheddar  mixed,  and  cook  gently  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before 
serving.  This  dish  may  be  made  with  vermicelli,  spaghetti,  or  any 
other Italian paste.  

No. 183. Macaroni alla Casalinga  

Ingredients: Macaroni, butter, stock, cheese, water, salt, nutmeg.  

Cut  up  a  quarter  pound  of  macaroni  in  small  pieces  and  put  it  in 
boiling salted water. When sufficiently cooked, drain and put it into a 
saucepan  with  two  ounces  of  butter,  add  good  gravy  or  stock,  three 
tablespoonsful  of  grated  Parmesan  and  Cheddar  mixed,  and  a  tiny 
pinch of nutmeg. Stir over a brisk fire, and serve very hot.  

No. 184. Macaroni al Sughillo  

Ingredients: Macaroni, stock, tomatoes, sausage, cheese.  

Half  cook  four  ounces  of  macaroni,  drain  it  and  put  it  in  layers  in  a 
fireproof dish, and gradually add good beef gravy, four tablespoonsful 
of  tomato  puree,  and  thin  slices  of  sausage.  Sprinkle  with  grated 
Parmesan  and  Cheddar,  and  cook  for  about  twenty  minutes.  Before 
serving pass the salamander over the top to brown the macaroni.  

 69 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 185. Macaroni alla Livornese  

Ingredients:  Macaroni,  mushrooms,  tomatoes,  Parmesan,  butter, 
pepper, salt, milk.  

Boil about four ounces of macaroni, and stew four or five mushrooms 
in milk with pepper and salt. Put a layer of the macaroni in a buttered 
fireproof  dish,  then  a  layer  of  tomato  puree,  then  a  layer  of  the 
mushrooms  and  another  layer  of  macaroni.  Dust  it  all  over  with 
grated Parmesan and Cheddar, put it in the oven for half an hour, and 
serve very hot.  

No. 186. Tagliarelle and Lobster  

Ingredients: Tagliarelle, lobster, cheese, butter.  

Boil  half  a  pound  of  tagliarelle,  and  cut  up  a  quarter  of  a  pound  of 
lobster.  Butter  a  fireproof  dish,  and  strew  it  well  with  grated 
Parmesan and Cheddar mixed, then put in the tagliarelle and lobster 
in  layers,  and  between  each  layer  add  a  little  butter.  Strew  grated 
cheese over the top, put it in the oven for twenty minutes, and brown 
the top with a salamander.  

No. 187. Polenta  

Polenta  is  made  of  ground  Indian-corn,  and  may  be  used  either  as  a 
separate  dish  or  as  a  garnish  for  roast  meat,  pigeons,  fowl,  &c.  It  is 
made  like  porridge;  gradually  drop  the  meal  with  one  hand  into 
boiling stock or water, and stir continually with a wooden spoon with 
the other hand. In about a quarter of an hour it will be quite thick and 
smooth,  then  add  a  little  butter  and  grated  Parmesan,  and  one  egg 
beaten up. Let it get cold, then put it in layers in a baking-dish, add a 
little butter to each layer, sprinkle with plenty of Parmesan, and bake 
it for about an hour in a slow oven. Serve hot.  

 70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 188. Polenta Pasticciata  

Ingredients: Polenta, butter, cheese, mushrooms, tomatoes.  

Prepare  a  good  polenta  as  above,  put  it  in  layers  in  a  fireproof  dish, 
and  add  by  degrees  one  and  a  half  ounces  of  melted  butter,  two 
cooked  mushrooms  cut  up,  and  two  tablespoonsful  of  grated  cheese. 
(If  you  like,  you  may  add  a  good-sized  tomato  mashed  up.)  Put  the 
dish in the oven, and before serving brown it over with salamander.  

No. 189. Battuffoli  

Ingredients: Polenta, onion, butter, salt, stock, Parmesan.  

Make a somewhat firm polenta (No. 187) with half a pound of ground 
maize and a pint and a half of salted water, add a small onion cut up 
and fried in butter, and stir the polenta until it is sufficiently cooked. 
Then take it off the fire and arrange it by spoonsful in a large fireproof 
dish, and give each spoonful the shape and size of an egg. Place them 
one  against  the  other,  and  when  the  first  layer  is  done,  pour  over  it 
some  very  good  gravy  or  stock,  and  plenty  of  grated  Parmesan. 
Arrange it thus layer by layer. Put it into the oven for twenty minutes, 
and serve very hot.  

No. 190. Risotto all'Italiana  

Ingredients: Rice, an onion, butter, stock, tomatoes, cheese.  

Fry a small onion slightly in butter, then add half a pint of very good 
stock. Boil four ounces of rice, but do not let it get pulpy, add it to the 
above  with  three  medium-sized  tomatoes  in  a  puree.  Mix  it  all  up 
well, add more stock, and two tablespoonsful of grated Parmesan and 
Cheddar mixed, and serve hot.  

No. 191. Risotto alla Genovese  

Ingredients:  Rice,  beef  or  veal,  onions,  parsley,  butter,  stock, 
Parmesan, sweetbread or sheep's brains.  

 71 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Cut  up a small onion and fry it slightly in butter with some  chopped 
parsley,  add  to  this  a  little  veal,  also  chopped  up,  and  a  little  suet. 
Cook  for  ten  minutes  and  then  add  two  ounces  of  rice  to  it.  Mix  all 
with  a  wooden  spoon,  and  after  a  few  minutes  begin  to  add  boiling 
stock  gradually;  stir  with  the  spoon,  so  that  the  rice  whilst  cooking 
may  absorb  the  stock;  when  it  is  half  cooked  add  a  few  spoonsful  of 
good  gravy  and  a  sweetbread  or  sheep's  brains  (previously  scalded 
and  cut  up  in  pieces),  and,  if  you  like,  a  little  powdered  saffron 
dissolved  in  a  spoonful  of  stock  and  three  tablespoonsful  of  grated 
Parmesan and Cheddar mixed. Stir well until the rice is quite cooked, 
but take care not to get it into a pulp.  

No. 192. Risotto alla Spagnuola  

Ingredients:  Rice,  pork,  ham,  onions,  tomatoes,  butter,  stock, 
vegetables, Parmesan.  

Put  a small bit of onion and an ounce  of butter into a saucepan, add 
half a pound of tomatoes cut up and fry for a few minutes. Then put in 
some bits of loin of pork cut into dice and some bits of lean ham. After 
a time add four ounces of rice and good stock, and as soon as it begins 
to  boil  put  on  the  cover  and  put  the  saucepan  on  a  moderate  fire. 
When the rice is half cooked add any sort of vegetable, by preference 
peas, asparagus cut up, beans, and cucumber cut up, cook for another 
quarter  of  an  hour,  and  serve  with  grated  Parmesan  and  Cheddar 
mixed and good gravy.  

No. 193. Risotto alla Capuccina  

Ingredients: Risotto (No. 190) eggs, truffles, smoked tongue, butter.  

Make  a  good  risotto,  and  when  cooked  put  it  into  a  fireproof  dish. 
When  cold  cut  into  shapes  with  a  dariole  mould  and  fry  for  a  few 
minutes in butter, then turn the darioles out, scoop out a little of each 
and  fill  it  with  eggs  beaten  up,  cover  each  with  a  slice  of  truffle  and 
garnish  with  a  little  chopped  tongue.  Put  them  in  the  oven  for  ten 
minutes.  

 72 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 194. Risotto alla Parigina  

Ingredients: Risotto (No. 190), game, sauce, butter.  

Make a good risotto, and when cooked pour it into a fireproof dish, let 
it  get  cold,  and  then  cut  it  out  with  a  dariole  mould,  or  else  form  it 
into little balls about the size of a pigeon's egg. Fry these in butter and 
serve with a rich game sauce poured over them.  

No. 195. Ravioli  

Ingredients: Flour, eggs, butter, salt, forcemeat, Parmesan, gravy or 
stock.  

Make  a  paste  with  a  quarter  pound  of  flour,  the  yolk  of  two  eggs,  a 
little  salt  and  two  ounces  of  butter.  Knead  this  into  a  firm  smooth 
paste and wrap it up in a damp cloth for half an hour, then roll it out 
as thin as possible, moisten it with a paste-brush dipped in water, and 
cut  it  into  circular  pieces  about  three  inches  in  diameter.  On  each 
piece  put  about  a  teaspoonful  of  forcemeat  of  fowl,  game,  or  fish 
mixed with a little grated Parmesan and the yolks of one or two eggs. 
Fold the paste over the forcemeat and pinch the edges together, so as 
to give them the shape of little puffs; let them dry in the larder, then 
blanch by boiling them in stock for quarter of an hour and drain them 
in  a  napkin.  Butter  a  fireproof  dish,  put  in  a  layer  of  the  ravioli, 
powder them over with grated Parmesan, then another layer of ravioli 
and more Parmesan. Then add enough very good gravy to cover them, 
put  the  dish  in  the  oven  for  about  twenty-five  minutes,  and  serve  in 
the dish.  

No. 196. Ravioli alla Fiorentina  

Ingredients:  Beetroot,  eggs,  Parmesan,  milk  or  cream,  nutmeg, 
spices, salt, flour, gravy.  

Wash a beetroot and boil it, and when it is sufficiently cooked throw it 
into cold water for a few minutes, then drain it, chop it up and add to 
it  four  eggs,  one  ounce  of  grated  Parmesan,  one  ounce  of  grated 

 73 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

Cheddar, two and a half ounces of boiled cream or milk, a small pinch 
of  nutmeg  and  a  little  salt.  Mix  all  well  together  into  a  smooth  firm 
paste, then roll into balls about the size of  a walnut, flour them over 
well, let them dry for half an hour, then drop them very carefully one 
by one into boiling stock and when they float on the top take them out 
with a perforated ladle, put them in a deep dish, dust them over with 
Parmesan and pour good meat or game gravy over them.  

No. 197. Gnocchi alla Romana  

Ingredients:  Semolina,  butter,  Parmesan,  eggs,  nutmeg,  milk, 
cream.  

Boil half a pint of milk in a saucepan, then add two ounces of butter, 
four ounces  of semolina, two tablespoonsful of grated Parmesan, the 
yolks of three eggs, and a tiny pinch of nutmeg. Mix all well together, 
then  let  it  cool,  and  spread  out  the  paste  so  that  it  is  about  the 
thickness of a finger. Put a little butter and grated Parmesan and two 
tablespoonsful of cream in a fireproof dish, cut out the semolina paste 
with  a  small  dariole  mould  and  put  it  in  the  dish.  Dust  a  little  more 
Parmesan over it, put it in the oven for five minutes and serve in the 
dish.  

No. 198. Gnocchi alla Lombarda  

Ingredients:  Potatoes,  flour,  salt,  Parmesan  and  Gruyere  cheese, 
butter, milk, eggs.  

Boil  two  or  three  big  potatoes,  and  pass  them  through  a  hair  sieve, 
mix in two tablespoonsful of flour, an egg beaten up, and enough milk 
to form a rather firm paste; stir until it is quite smooth. Roll it into the 
shape of a German sausage, cut it into rounds about three quarters of 
an inch thick, and put it into the larder to dry for about half an hour. 
Then  drop  the  gnocchi  one  by  one  into  boiling  salted  water  and  boil 
for  ten  minutes.  Take  them  out  with  a  slice,  and  put  them  in  a  well-
buttered  fireproof  dish,  add  butter  between  each  layer,  and  strew 
plenty  of  grated  Parmesan  and  Cheddar  over  them.  Put  them  in  the 

 74 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

oven  for  ten  minutes,  brown  the  top  with  a  salamander,  and  serve 
very hot.  

No. 199. Frittata di Riso (Savoury Rice Pancake)  

Ingredients: Rice, milk, salt, butter, cinnamon, eggs, Parmesan.  

Boil quarter of a pound of rice in milk until it is quite soft and pulpy, 
drain  off  the  milk  and  add  to  the  rice  an  ounce  of  butter,  two 
tablespoonsful  of  grated  Parmesan,  and  a  pinch  of  cinnamon,  and 
when it has got rather cold, the yolks  of four eggs  beaten up. Mix all 
well  together,  and  with  this  make  a  pancake  with  butter  in  a  frying 
pan.  

OMELETTES AND OTHER EGG DISHES  

No. 200. Uova al Tartufi (Eggs with Truffles)  

Ingredients: Eggs, butter, cream, truffles, Velute sauce, croutons.  

Beat  up  six  eggs,  pass  them  through  a  sieve,  and  put  them  into  a 
saucepan with two ounces of butter and two tablespoonsful of cream. 
Put  the  saucepan  in  a  bain-marie,  and  stir  so  that  the  eggs  may  not 
adhere. Sauté some slices of truffle in butter, cover them with Velute 
sauce (No. 2) and a glass of Marsala, and add them to the eggs. Serve 
very  hot  with  fried  and  glazed  croutons.  Instead  of  truffles  you  can 
use asparagus tips, peas, or cooked ham.  

No. 201. Uova al Pomidoro (Eggs and Tomatoes)  

Ingredients: Eggs, salt, tomatoes, onion, parsley, butter, pepper.  

Cut  up  three  or  four  tomatoes,  and  put  them  into  a  stewpan  with  a 
piece of butter the size of a walnut and a clove of garlic with a cut in it. 

 75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

Put  the  lid  on  the  stewpan  and  cook  till  quite  soft,  then  take  out  the 
garlic,  strain  the  tomatoes  through  a  fine  strainer  into  a  bain-marie, 
beat  up  two  eggs  and  add  them  to  the  tomatoes,  and  stir  till  quite 
thick,  then  put  in  two  tablespoonsful  of  grated  cheese,  and  serve  on 
toast.  

No. 202. Uova ripiene (Canapes of Egg)  

Ingredients:  Eggs,  butter,  salt,  pepper,  nutmeg,  cheese,  parsley, 
mushrooms, Bechamel and Espagnole sauce, stock.  

Boil as many eggs as you want hard, and cut them in half lengthwise; 
take out the yolks and mix them with some fresh butter, salt, pepper, 
very little nutmeg, grated cheese, a little chopped parsley, and cooked 
mushrooms  also  chopped.  Then  mix  two  tablespoonsful  of  good 
Bechamel sauce (No. 3) with the raw yolk of one or two eggs and add 
it to the rest. Put all in a saucepan with an ounce of butter and good 
stock,  then  fill  up  the  white  halves  with  the  mixture,  giving  them  a 
good  shape;  heat  them  in  a  bain-marie,  and  serve  with  a  very  good 
clear Espagnole sauce (No. 1).  

No. 203. Uova alla Fiorentina (Eggs)  

Ingredients:  Eggs,  butter,  Parmesan,  cream,  flour,  salt,  pepper, 
curds.  

Boil as many eggs as you require hard, then cut them in half and take 
out  the  yolks  and  pound  them  in  a  mortar  with  equal  quantities  of 
butter  and  curds,  a  tablespoonful  of  grated  Parmesan,  salt  and 
pepper. Put this in a saucepan and add the yolks of eight eggs and the 
white  of  one  (this  is  for  twelve  people),  mix  all  well  together  and 
reduce  a little. With this  mixture fill the hard whites of  the eggs  and 
spread  the  rest  of  the  sauce  on  the  bottom  of  the  dish,  and  on  this 
place  the  whites.  Then  in  another  saucepan  mix  half  a  gill  of  cream 
and  an ounce of  butter, a dessert-spoonful of flour, salt, and pepper; 
let this boil for a minute, and then glaze over the eggs in the dish with 
it, and  on  the top  of each egg put a little bit of  butter,  and over all a 

 76 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

powdering of grated cheese. Put this in the oven, pass the salamander 
over the top, and when the cheese is coloured serve at once.  

No. 204. Uova in fili (Egg Canapes)  

Ingredients:  Eggs,  butter,  mushrooms,  onions,  flour,  white  wine, 
fish or meat stock, salt, pepper, croutons of bread.  

Put  into  a  saucepan  two  ounces  of  butter,  three  large  fresh 
mushrooms cut into slices, and an onion cut up, fry them slightly, and 
when the onion begins to colour add a spoonful of flour, a quarter of a 
glass  of  Chablis,  salt  and  pepper,  and  occasionally  add  a  spoonful  of 
either  fish  or  meat  stock.  Let  this  simmer  for  half  an  hour,  so  as  to 
reduce it to a thick sauce. Then boil as many eggs as you want hard; 
take out the yolks, but keep them whole. Cut up the whites into slices, 
and add them to the above sauce, pour the sauce into a  dish, and on 
the top of it place the whole yolks of egg, each on a crouton of bread.  

No. 205. Frittata di funghi (Mushroom Omelette)  

Ingredients:  Mushrooms,  butter,  eggs,  bread  crumbs,  Parmesan, 
marjoram, garlic.  

Clean  four  or  five  mushrooms,  cut  them  up,  and  put  them  into  a 
frying-pan with one and a half ounces of butter, a clove of garlic with 
two cuts in it, and a little salt; fry them lightly till the mushrooms are 
nearly cooked, and then take out the garlic. In the meantime beat up 
separately  the  yolks  and  the  whites  of  two  or  three  eggs,  add  a  little 
crumb of bread soaked in water, a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, 
and  two  leaves  of  marjoram;  go  on  beating  all  up  until  the  crumb  of 
bread  has  become  entirely  absorbed  by  the  eggs,  then  pour  this 
mixture  into  the  frying-pan  with  the  mushrooms,  mix  all  well 
together and make an omelette in the usual way.  

 77 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 206. Frittata con Pomidoro (Tomato Omelette)  

Ingredients: Eggs, tomatoes, butter, marjoram, parsley, spice.  

Peel  two  tomatoes  and  take  out  the  seeds;  then  mix  them  with  an 
ounce of butter, chopped marjoram, parsley, and a tiny pinch of spice. 
Add three eggs beaten up (the yolks and whites separately), and make 
an omelette.  

No. 207. Frittata con Asparagi (Asparagus Omelette)  

Ingredients: Eggs, asparagus, butter, ham, herbs, cheese.  

Blanch  a  dozen  heads  of  asparagus  and  cook  them  slightly,  then  cut 
them up and mix with two ounces of butter, bits of cut-up ham, herbs, 
and a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan. Add them to three beaten-up 
eggs and make an omelette.  

No. 208. Frittata con erbe (Omelette with Herbs)  

Ingredients:  Eggs,  onions,  sorrel,  mint,  parsley,  asparagus, 
marjoram, salt, pepper, butter.  

Chop a little sorrel, a small bit of onion, mint, parsley, marjoram, and 
fry  in  two  ounces  of  butter,  add  some  cut-up  asparagus,  salt,  and 
pepper. Then add three eggs beaten up and a little grated cheese, and 
make your omelette.  

No. 209. Frittata Montata (Omelette Souffle)  

Ingredients: Eggs, Parmesan, pepper, parsley.  

Beat  up  the  whites  of  three  eggs  to  a  froth  and  the  yolks  separately 
with a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, chopped parsley, and a little 
pepper. Then mix them and make a light omelette.  

 78 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 210. Frittata di Prosciutto (Ham Omelette)  

Ingredients: Eggs, ham, Parmesan, mint, pepper, clotted cream.  

Beat  up  three  eggs  and  add  to  them  two  tablespoonsful  of  clotted 
cream,  one  tablespoonful  of  chopped  ham,  one  of  grated  Parmesan, 
chopped mint and a little pepper, and make the omelette in the usual 
way.  

SWEETS AND CAKES  

No. 211. Bodino of Semolina  

Ingredients:  Semolina,  milk,  eggs,  castor  sugar,  lemon,  sultanas, 
rum, butter, cream, or Zabajone (No. 222).  

Boil one and a half pints of milk with four ounces of castor sugar, and 
gradually  add  five  ounces  of  semolina,  boil  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
more  and  stir  continually  with  a  wooden  spoon,  then  take  the 
saucepan off the fire, and when it is cooled a little, add the yolks of six 
and the whites of two eggs well beaten up, a little grated lemon peel, 
three-quarters  of an  ounce of sultanas  and  two small glasses of rum. 
Mix  well,  so  as  to  get  it  very  smooth,  pour  it  into  a  buttered  mould 
and  serve  either  hot  or  cold.  If  cold,  put  whipped  cream  flavoured 
with stick vanilla round the dish; if hot, a Zabajone (No. 222).  

No. 212. Crema rappresa (Coffee Cream)  

Ingredients: Coffee, cream, eggs, sugar, butter.  

Bruise  five  ounces  of  freshly  roasted  Mocha  coffee,  and  add  it  to 
three-quarters  of  a  pint  of  boiling  cream;  cover  the  saucepan,  let  it 
simmer for twenty minutes, then pass through a bit of fine muslin. In 
the meantime mix the yolks of ten eggs and two whole eggs with eight 
ounces of  castor sugar and a glass of  cream;  add the  coffee cream to 

 79 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

this  and  pass  the  whole  through  a  fine  sieve  into  a  buttered  mould. 
Steam in a bain-marie for rather more than an hour, but do not let the 
water  boil;  then  put  the  cream  on  ice  for  about  an  hour,  and  before 
serving  turn  it  out  on  a  dish  and  pour  some  cream  flavoured  with 
stick vanilla round it.  

No. 213. Crema Montata alle Fragole (Strawberry Cream)  

Ingredients:  Cream,  castor  sugar,  Maraschino,  strawberries  or 
strawberry jam.  

Put a pint of cream on ice, and after two hours whip it up. Pass three 
tablespoonsful  of  strawberry  jam  through  a  sieve  and  add  two 
tablespoonsful of Maraschino; mix this with the cream and build it up 
into  a  pyramid.  Garnish  with  meringue  biscuits  and  serve  quickly. 
You  may  use  fresh  strawberries  when  in  season,  but  then  add  castor 
sugar to taste.  

No. 214. Croccante di Mandorle (Cream Nougat)  

Ingredients:  Almonds,  sugar,  lemon  juice,  butter,  castor  sugar, 
pistachios, preserved fruits.  

Blanch half a pound of almonds, cut them into shreds and dry them in 
a  slow  oven  until  they  are  a  light  brown  colour;  then  put  a  quarter 
pound of lump sugar into a saucepan  and caramel it lightly; stir well 
with  a  wooden  spoon.  When  the  sugar  is  dissolved,  throw  the  hot 
almonds into it and also a little lemon juice. Take the saucepan off the 
fire  and  mix  the  almonds  with  the  sugar,  pour  it  into  a  buttered 
mould  and  press  it  against  the  sides  of  the  mould  with  a  lemon,  but 
remember that the casing of sugar must be very thin. (You may, if you 
like,  spread  out  the  mixture  on  a  flat  dish  and  line  the  mould  with 
your  hands,  but  the  sugar  must  be  kept  hot.)  Then  take  it  out  of  the 
mould  and  decorate  it  with  castor  sugar,  pistacchio  nuts,  and 
preserved  fruits.  Fill  this  case  with  whipped  cream  and  preserved 
fruits or fresh strawberries.  

 80 

 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 215. Crema tartara alla Caramella (Caramel Cream)  

Ingredients:  Cream,  eggs,  caramel  sugar,  vanilla  or 
flavouring.  

lemon 

Boil a pint  of cream and give it any flavour you like. When  cold, add 
the  yolks  of  eight  eggs  and  two  tablespoonsful  of  castor  sugar,  mix 
well and pass it through a sieve; then  burn some sugar to a caramel, 
line a smooth mould with it and pour the cream into it. Boil in a bain-
marie for an hour and serve hot or cold.  

No. 216. Cremona Cake  

Ingredients:  Ground  rice,  ground  maize,  sugar,  one  orange,  eggs, 
salt, cream, Maraschino, almonds, preserved cherries.  

Weigh  three  eggs,  and  take  equal  quantities  of  castor  sugar,  butter, 
ground rice and maize (the last two together); make a light paste with 
them, but only use one whole egg and the yolks of the two others, add 
the scraped peel of an orange and a pinch of salt. Roll this paste out to 
the thickness of a five-shilling piece, colour it with the yolk of an egg 
and  bake  it  in  a  cake  tin  in  a  hot  oven  until  it  is  a  good  colour,  then 
take it out and cut it into four equal circular pieces. Have ready some 
well-whipped cream and flavour it with Maraschino, put a thick layer 
of  this  on  one  of  the  rounds  of  pastry,  then  cover  it  with:  the  next 
round, on which also put a layer of cream, and so on until you come to 
the  last  round,  which  forms  the  top  of  the  cake.  Then  split  some 
almonds and colour them in the oven, cover the top of the cake with 
icing  sugar  flavoured  with  orange,  and  decorate  the  top  with  the 
almonds and preserved cherries.  

No. 217. Cake alla Tolentina  

Ingredients: Sponge-cake, jam, brandy or Maraschino, cream, pine-
apple.  

Make  a  medium-sized  sponge-cake;  when  cold  cut  off  the  top  and 
scoop  out  all  the  middle  and  leave  only  the  brown  case;  cover  the 

 81 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

outside with a good coating of jam or red currant jelly, and decorate it 
with some of the white of the cake cut into fancy shapes. Soak the rest 
of  the  crumb  in  brandy  or  Maraschino  and  mix  it  with  quarter  of  a 
pint  of  whipped  cream  and  bits  of  pineapple  cut  into  small  dice;  fill 
the  cake  with  this;  pile  it  up  high  in  the  centre  and  decorate  the  top 
with the brown top cut into fancy shapes.  

No. 218. Riso all'Imperatrice  

Ingredients:  Rice,  sugar,  milk,  ice,  preserved  fruits,  blanc-mange, 
Maraschino, cream.  

Boil  two  dessert-spoonsful  of  rice  and  one  of  sugar  in  milk.  When 
sufficiently boiled, drain the rice and let it get cold. In the meantime 
place  a  mould  on  ice,  and  decorate  it  with  slices  of  preserved  fruit, 
and  fix  them  to  the  mould  with  just  enough  nearly  cold  dissolved 
isinglass to keep them in place. Also put half a pint of blanc-mange on 
the  ice,  and  stir  it  till  it  is  the  right  consistency,  gradually  add  the 
boiled  rice,  half  a  glass  of  Maraschino,  some  bits  of  pineapple  cut  in 
dice, and last of all half a pint of whipped cream. Fill the mould with 
this,  and  when  it  is  sufficiently  cold,  turn  it  out  and  serve  with  a 
garnish of glace fruits or a few brandy cherries.  

No. 219. Amaretti leggieri (Almond Cakes)  

Ingredients: Almonds (sweet and bitter), eggs, castor sugar.  

Blanch equal quantities of sweet and bitter almonds, and dry them a 
little in the oven, then pound them in a mortar, and add nearly double 
their  quantity  of  castor  sugar.  Mix  with  the  white  of  an  egg  well 
beaten  up  into  a  snow,  and  shape  into  little  balls  about  the  size  of  a 
pigeon's egg. Put them on a piece of stout white paper, and bake them 
in a very slow oven. They should be very light and delicate in flavour.  

 82 

 
 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 220. Cakes alla Livornese  

Ingredients: Almonds, eggs, sugar, salt, potato flour, butter.  

Pound  two  ounces  of  almonds,  and  mix  them  with  the  yolks  of  two 
eggs and a spoonful of castor sugar flavoured with orange juice. Then 
mix two  ounces of sugar with an egg, and to this add the almonds, a 
pinch of  salt, and gradually strew in  one and a half ounces of  potato 
flour. When it is all well mixed, add one ounce of melted butter, shape 
the cakes and bake them in a slow oven.  

No. 221. Genoese Pastry  

Ingredients:  Eggs,  sugar,  butter,  flour,  almonds,  orange  or  lemon, 
brandy.  

Weigh  four  eggs,  and  take  equal  weights  of  castor  sugar,  butter,  and 
flour.  Pound  three  ounces  of  almonds,  and  mix  them  with  an  egg, 
melt the butter, and mix all the ingredients with a wooden spoon in a 
pudding  basin  for  ten  minutes,  then  add  a  little  scraped  orange  or 
lemon peel, and a dessert-spoonful of brandy. Spread out the paste in 
thin layers on a copper baking sheet, cover them with buttered paper, 
and bake in a moderately hot oven.  

These cakes must be cut into shapes when they are hot, as otherwise 
they will break.  

No. 222. Zabajone  

Ingredients:  Eggs,  sugar,  Marsala,  Maraschino  or  other  light-
coloured liqueur, sponge fingers.  

Zabajone  is  a  kind  of  syllabub.  It  is  made  with  Marsala  and 
Maraschino, or Marsala and yellow Chartreuse. Reckon the quantities 
as follows: for each person the yolks of three eggs, one teaspoonful of 
castor sugar to each egg, and a wine-glass of wine and liqueur mixed. 
Whip up the yolks of the eggs with the sugar, then gradually add the 
wine.  Put  this  in  a  bain-marie,  and  stir  until  it  has  thickened  to  the 

 83 

 
 
www.obooko.com 

consistency  of  a  custard.  Take  care,  however,  that  it  does  not  boil. 
Serve hot in custard glasses, and hand sponge fingers with it.  

No. 223. Iced Zabajone  

Ingredients:  Eggs,  castor  sugar,  Marsala,  cinnamon,  lemon,  stick 
vanilla, rum, Maraschino, butter, ice.  

Mix the yolks of ten eggs, two  dessert-spoonsful of castor sugar,  and 
three wine-glasses of Marsala, add half a stick of vanilla, a small bit of 
whole cinnamon, and the peel of half a lemon cut into slices.  

Whip  this  up  lightly  over  a  slow  fire  until  it  is  nearly  boiling  and 
slightly  frothy;  then  remove  it,  take  out  the  cinnamon,  vanilla,  and 
lemon pool, and whip up the rest for a minute or two away from the 
fire.  Add  a  tablespoonful  of  Maraschino  and  one  of  rum,  and,  if  you 
like, a small quantity of dissolved isinglass. Stir up the whole, pour it 
into a silver souffle dish, and put it on ice. Serve with sponge cakes or 
iced wafers.  

No. 224. Pan-forte di Siena (Sienese Hardbake)  

Ingredients:  Honey,  almonds,  filberts,  candied  lemon  peel,  pepper, 
cinnamon, chocolate, corn flour, large wafers.  

Boil half a pound of honey in a copper vessel, and then add to it a few 
blanched  almonds  and  filberts  cut  in  halves  or  quarters  and  slightly 
browned, a little candied lemon peel, a dust of pepper and powdered 
cinnamon  and  a  quarter  pound  of  grated  chocolate.  Mix  all  well 
together,  and  gradually  add  a  tablespoonful  of  corn  flour  end  two  of 
ground almonds to thicken it. Then take the vessel off the fire, spread 
the mixture on large wafers, and make each cake about an inch thick. 
Garnish  them  on  the  top  with  almonds  cut  in  half,  and  dust  over  a 
little  powdered  sugar  and  cinnamon,  then  put  them  in  a  very  slow 
oven for an hour.  

 84 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

No. 225. Fish Sauce  

Add  one  dessert-spoonful  of  New  Century  Sauce  sauce  to  a  quarter 
pint of melted butter sauce.  

No.  226.  Sauce  Piquante  (for  Meat,  Fowl,  Game,  Rabbit, 
&c.)  

One  dessert-spoonful  to  a  quarter  pint  of  ordinary  brown  or  white 
stock.  It  may  be  thickened  by  a  roux  made  by  frying  two  ounces  of 
butter with two ounces of flour.  

No. 227. Sauce for Venison, Hare, &c.  

Two  dessert-spoonsful  of  New  Century  Sauce  to  half  a  pint  of  game 
gravy or sauce, and a small teaspoonful of red currant jelly.  

No. 228. Tomato Sauce Piquante  

Fry  three  medium-sized  tomatoes  in  one  and  a  half  ounce  of  butter. 
Pass  this  through  a  sieve,  then  boil  it  up  in  a  bain-marie  till  it 
thickens, and add one dessertspoonful of New Century Sauce.  

No. 229. Sauce for Roast Pork, Ham, &c.  

Add  to  any  ordinary  white  or  brown  sauce  one  dessert-spoonful  of 
New  Century  Sauce  and  two  of  port  or  Burgundy  if  the  sauce  is 
brown, two of Chablis if white.  

No. 230. For masking Cutlets, &c.  

Making  a  roux  by  frying  two  ounces  of  butter  with  two  ounces  of 
flour, and add two tablespoonsful of boiling stock. Stir in one dessert-
spoonful  of  New  Century  Sauce.  Let  it  get  cold,  and  it  will  then  be 
quite firm and ready for masking cutlets, &c.  

 85 

 
 
 
 
 
www.obooko.com 

This is a free digital edition for members of obooko.com 
For access to hundreds of free e-books please visit: 
www.obooko.com 

 86 

 
 
 
 
 
